Tyrannosaurus
Tyrannosaurus
The species Tyrannosaurus rex (rex meaning "king" in Latin), is one of the most well-represented of the large theropods.
Tyrannosaurus lived throughout what is now western North America, on what was then an island continent known as Laramidia.
Tyrannosaurus had a much wider range than other tyrannosaurids.
Like other tyrannosaurids, Tyrannosaurus was a bipedal carnivore with a massive skull balanced by a long, heavy tail.
Relative to its large and powerful hind limbs, Tyrannosaurus fore limbs were short but unusually powerful for their size and had two clawed digits.
Tyrannosaurus rex is still among the largest known land predators and is estimated to have exerted the largest bite force among all terrestrial animals.
By far the largest carnivore in its environment, Tyrannosaurus rex was most likely an apex predator, preying upon hadrosaurs, ceratopsians, and possibly sauropods.
The question of whether Tyrannosaurus was an apex predator or a pure scavenger was among the longest ongoing debates in paleontology.
It is accepted now that Tyrannosaurus rex acted as a predator, and scavenged as modern mammalian and avian predators do.
More than 50 specimens of Tyrannosaurus rex have been identified, some of which are nearly complete skeletons.
The feeding habits, physiology and potential speed of Tyrannosaurus rex are a few subjects of debate.
Tyrannosaurus rex was one of the largest land carnivores of all time.
The largest known Tyrannosaurus rex skulls measure up to 1.45 meters (4.8 ft) in length.
The teeth of Tyrannosaurus rex displayed marked heterodonty (differences in shape).
Modern representations show Tyrannosaurus rex with its body approximately parallel to the ground and tail extended behind the body to balance the head.
When Tyrannosaurus rex was first discovered, the humerus was the only element of the forelimb known.
Tyrannosaurus rex arms are very small relative to overall body size, measuring only 1 meter (3.3 ft) long, and some scholars have labelled them as vestigial.
As of 2014, it is not clear if Tyrannosaurus was endothermic (warm-blooded).
Tyrannosaurus, like most dinosaurs, was long thought to have an ectothermic ("cold-blooded") reptilian metabolism.
Histological evidence of high growth rates in young Tyrannosaurus rex, comparable to those of mammals and birds, may support the hypothesis of a high metabolism.
Two isolated fossilized footprints have been tentatively assigned to Tyrannosaurus rex.
Most recent research on Tyrannosaurus locomotion does not support speeds faster than 40 kilometers per hour (25 mph), i.e. moderate-speed running.
Those who argue that Tyrannosaurus was incapable of running estimate the top speed of Tyrannosaurus at about 17 kilometers per hour (11 mph).
Tyrannosaurus had very large olfactory bulbs and olfactory nerves relative to their brain size, the organs responsible for a heightened sense of smell.
The sense of smell in tyrannosaurs may have been comparable to modern vultures, which use scent to track carcasses for scavenging.
Research on the olfactory bulbs has shown that Tyrannosaurus rex had the most highly developed sense of smell of 21 sampled non-avian dinosaur species.
The debate about whether Tyrannosaurus was a predator or a pure scavenger is as old as the debate about its locomotion.
The eye sockets of tyrannosaurs are positioned so that the eyes would point forward, giving them binocular vision slightly better than that of modern hawks.
Tyrannosaurus may have had infectious saliva used to kill its prey.
Tyrannosaurus, and most other theropods, probably primarily processed carcasses with lateral shakes of the head, like crocodilians.
Tyrannosaurus lived during what is referred to as the Lancian faunal stage (Maastrichtian age) at the end of the Late Cretaceous.
Tyrannosaurus ranged from Canada in the north to at least Texas and New Mexico in the south of Laramidia.
Tyrannosaurus remains have been discovered in different ecosystems, including inland and coastal subtropical, and semi-arid plains.
Since it was first described in 1905, Tyrannosaurus rex has become the most widely recognized dinosaur species in popular culture.