Galaxy
Galaxy
A galaxy is a gravitationally bound system of stars, stellar remnants, interstellar gas, dust, and dark matter.
Galaxies range in size from dwarfs with just a few billion stars to giants with one hundred trillion stars, each orbiting its galaxy's center of mass.
Galaxies are categorized according to their visual morphology as elliptical, spiral and irregular.
Many galaxies are thought to have black holes at their active centers.
Approximately 170 billion (1.7 × 1011) to 200 billion (2.0 × 1011) galaxies exist in the observable universe.
Most of the galaxies are 1,000 to 100,000 parsecs in diameter and usually separated by distances on the order of millions of parsecs.
The space between galaxies is filled with a tenuous gas having an average density of less than one atom per cubic meter.
The majority of galaxies are gravitationally organized into associations known as galaxy groups, clusters, and superclusters.
The word Universe was later understood to mean the entirety of existence, so this expression fell into disuse and the objects instead became known as galaxies.
A few galaxies outside the Milky Way are visible in the night sky to the unaided eye.
The largest galaxies are giant ellipticals.
Many elliptical galaxies are believed to form due to the interaction of galaxies, resulting in a collision and merger.
Starburst galaxies are the result of a galactic collision that can result in the formation of an elliptical galaxy.
A shell galaxy is a type of elliptical galaxy where the stars in the galaxy's halo are arranged in concentric shells.
Spiral galaxies consist of a rotating disk of stars and interstellar medium, along with a central bulge of generally older stars.
In spiral galaxies, the spiral arms do have the shape of approximate logarithmic spirals.
A majority of spiral galaxies, including our own Milky Way galaxy, have a linear, bar-shaped band of stars that extends outward to either side of the core.
Many barred spiral galaxies are active, possibly as a result of gas being channeled into the core along the arms.
Our own galaxy, the Milky Way, is a large disk-shaped barred-spiral galaxy about 30 kiloparsecs in diameter and a kiloparsec thick.
The Milky Way is about 100,000 light-years in diameter.
Despite the prominence of large elliptical and spiral galaxies, most galaxies in the Universe are dwarf galaxies.
Dwarf galaxies are relatively small when compared with other galactic formations, being about one hundredth the size of the Milky Way, containing only a few billion stars.
Ultra-compact dwarf galaxies have recently been discovered that are only 100 parsecs across.
Many dwarf galaxies may orbit a single larger galaxy; the Milky Way has at least a dozen such satellites, with an estimated 300–500 yet to be discovered.
Interactions between galaxies are relatively frequent, and they can play an important role in galactic evolution.
Near misses between galaxies result in warping distortions due to tidal interactions, and may cause some exchange of gas and dust.
The stars of interacting galaxies will usually not collide, but the gas and dust within the two forms will interact, sometimes triggering star formation.
Stars are created within galaxies from a reserve of cold gas that forms into giant molecular clouds.
Some galaxies have been observed to form stars at an exceptional rate, which is known as a starburst.
Starburst galaxies were more common during the early history of the Universe, and, at present, still contribute an estimated 15% to the total star production rate.