Archimedes
Archimedes
Archimedes was an Ancient Greek mathematician, physicist, engineer, inventor, and astronomer.
Although few details of Archimedes life are known, he is regarded as one of the leading scientists in classical antiquity.
Archimedes was one of the first to apply mathematics to physical phenomena, founding hydrostatics and statics, including an explanation of the principle of the lever.
Archimedes is credited with designing innovative machines, such as his screw pump, compound pulleys, and defensive war machines to protect his native Syracuse from invasion.
Archimedes died during the Siege of Syracuse when he was killed by a Roman soldier despite orders that he should not be harmed.
Unlike his inventions, the mathematical writings of Archimedes were little known in antiquity.
The relatively few copies of Archimedes' written work that survived through the Middle Ages were an influential source of ideas for scientists during the Renaissance.
Archimedes was born c. 287 BC in the seaport city of Syracuse, Sicily.
A biography of Archimedes was written by his friend Heracleides but this work has been lost, leaving the details of his life obscure.
It is unknown, for instance, whether Archimedes ever married or had children.
During his youth, Archimedes may have studied in Alexandria, Egypt.
According to the popular account given by Plutarch, Archimedes was contemplating a mathematical diagram when the city was captured.
The last words attributed to Archimedes are "Do not disturb my circles".
The tomb of Archimedes carried a sculpture illustrating his favorite mathematical proof, consisting of a sphere and a cylinder of the same height and diameter.
Archimedes had proven that the volume and surface area of the sphere are two thirds that of the cylinder including its bases.
The standard versions of the life of Archimedes were written long after his death by the historians of Ancient Rome.
The account of the siege of Syracuse given by Polybius in his Universal History was written around seventy years after Archimedes' death.
The most widely known anecdote about Archimedes tells of how he invented a method for determining the volume of an object with an irregular shape.
A large part of Archimedes' work in engineering arose from fulfilling the needs of his home city of Syracuse.
The Archimedes' screw is still in use today for pumping liquids and granulated solids such as coal and grain.
The Claw of Archimedes is a weapon that he is said to have designed in order to defend the city of Syracuse.
Archimedes may have used mirrors acting collectively as a parabolic reflector to burn ships attacking Syracuse.
The 2nd century AD author Lucian wrote that during the Siege of Syracuse (c. 214–212 BC), Archimedes destroyed enemy ships with fire.
While Archimedes did not invent the lever, he gave an explanation of the principle involved in his work On the Equilibrium of Planes.
According to Pappus of Alexandria, Archimedes' work on levers caused him to remark: "Give me a place to stand on, and I will move the Earth."
Plutarch describes how Archimedes designed block-and-tackle pulley systems, allowing sailors to use the principle of leverage to lift objects that would otherwise have been too heavy to move.
Archimedes has been credited with improving the power and accuracy of the catapult, and with inventing the odometer.
While he is often regarded as a designer of mechanical devices, Archimedes also made contributions to the field of mathematics.
Archimedes proved that the area of a circle was equal to π multiplied by the square of the radius of the circle.
In On the Sphere and Cylinder, Archimedes postulates that any magnitude when added to itself enough times will exceed any given magnitude.
In Measurement of a Circle, Archimedes gives the value of the square root of 3 as lying between 265/153 and 1351/780. This a very accurate estimate.
In The Sand Reckoner, Archimedes set out to calculate the number of grains of sand that the universe could contain.
The works of Archimedes were written in Doric Greek, the dialect of ancient Syracuse.
The written work of Archimedes has not survived as well as that of Euclid, and seven of his treatises are known to have existed only through other references.
During his lifetime, Archimedes made his work known through correspondence with the mathematicians in Alexandria.
Archimedes' Book of Lemmas is a treatise with fifteen propositions on the nature of circles.
It has also been claimed that Heron's formula for calculating the area of a triangle from the length of its sides was known to Archimedes.