Kitsune
Kitsune
Kitsune is the Japanese word for fox.
Foxes are a common subject of Japanese folklore; in English, kitsune refers to them in this context.
Stories depict them as intelligent beings and as possessing magical abilities that increase with their age and wisdom.
According to Yokai folklore, all foxes have the ability to shape shift into human form.
Foxes and human beings lived close together in ancient Japan; this companionship gave rise to legends about the creatures.
Kitsune have become closely associated with Inari, a Shinto kami or spirit, and serve as its messengers.
The more tails a kitsune has — they may have as many as nine—the older, wiser, and more powerful it is.
Because of their potential power and influence, some people make offerings to them as to a deity.
Foxes were often seen as "witch animals", especially during the superstitious Edo period (1603–1867).
Japanese fox myths had its origins in Chinese mythology.
The nine-tailed foxes came to be adapted as a motif from Chinese mythology to Japanese mythology.
Kitsu is now archaic; in modern Japanese, a fox's cry is transcribed as kon kon or gon gon.
One of the oldest surviving kitsune tales provides a widely known folk etymology of the word kitsune.
Kitsune are believed to possess superior intelligence, long life, and magical powers.
Kitsune are a type of yokai, or spiritual entity, and the word kitsune is often translated as fox spirit.
Because the word spirit is used to reflect a state of knowledge or enlightenment, all long-lived foxes gain supernatural abilities.
Physically, kitsune are noted for having as many as nine tails.
Generally, a greater number of tails indicates an older and more powerful fox; in fact, some folktales say that a fox will only grow additional tails after it has lived 100 years.
One, five, seven, and nine tails are the most common numbers in folk stories.
When a kitsune gains its ninth tail, its fur becomes white or gold.
After reaching 1,000 years of age and gaining it ninth tail, a kitsune turns a golden color, becoming the most powerful form of the kitsune, and then ascends to the heavens.
Nine-tailed kitsune gain the abilities to see and hear anything happening anywhere in the world. Other tales credit them with infinite wisdom (omniscience).
A kitsune may take on human form, an ability learned when it reaches a certain age — usually 100 years, although some tales say 50.
As a common prerequisite for the transformation, the fox must place reeds, a broad leaf, or a skull over its head.
Common forms assumed by kitsune include beautiful women, young girls, or elderly men.
Kitsune can duplicate the appearance of a specific person.
Foxes are particularly renowned for impersonating beautiful women.
Common belief in medieval Japan was that any woman encountered alone, especially at dusk or night, could be a fox.
Kitsune-gao or fox-faced refers to human females who have a narrow face with close-set eyes, thin eyebrows, and high cheekbones.
In some stories, kitsune have difficulty hiding their tails when they take human form; looking for the tail is a common method of discerning the creature's true nature.
Kitsune may also be exposed while in human form by their fear and hatred of dogs, and some become so rattled by their presence that they revert to the form of a fox and flee.
Other supernatural abilities commonly attributed to the kitsune include possession, flight, invisibility, and the creation of illusions.
Some tales speak of kitsune, able to bend time and space, drive people mad, or take fantastic shapes such as a tree of incredible height or a second moon in the sky.
Some kitsune have characteristics reminiscent of vampires or succubi and feed on the life or spirit of human beings, generally through sexual contact.
Embedded in Japanese folklore as they are, kitsune appear in numerous Japanese works.
Japanese metal idol band Babymetal refer to the kitsune myth in their lyrics and include the use of fox masks, hand signs, and animation interludes during live shows.
Western authors of fiction have made use of the kitsune legends.
Kitsune are associated with Inari, the Shinto deity of rice. This association has reinforced the fox's supernatural significance.
Originally, kitsune were Inari's messengers, but the line between the two is now blurred so that Inari Okami may be depicted as a fox.
Entire shrines are dedicated to kitsune, where devotees can leave offerings.
Fox spirits are said to be particularly fond of a fried sliced tofu, which is accordingly found in the noodle-based dishes kitsune udon and kitsune soba.
Inari-zushi is a type of sushi named for Inari Okami that consists of rice-filled pouches of fried tofu.
Inari's kitsune are white, a color of good omen. They possess the power to ward off evil, and they sometimes serve as guardian spirits.
Kitsune are often presented as tricksters, with motives that vary from mischief to malevolence.
Stories tell of kitsune playing tricks on overly proud samurai, greedy merchants, and boastful commoners.
Some common goals of trickster kitsune include seduction, theft of food, humiliation of the prideful, or vengeance for a perceived slight.
Kitsune keep their promises and strive to repay any favor.
Occasionally a kitsune attaches itself to a person or household, where they can cause all sorts of mischief.
In one story from the 12th century, only the homeowner's threat to exterminate the foxes convinces them to behave.
Some kitsune use their magic for the benefit of their companion or hosts as long as the human beings treat them with respect.
If a kitsune offers a payment or reward that includes money or material wealth, part or all of the sum will consist of valueless items under a magical illusion.
True kitsune gifts are usually intangibles, such as protection, knowledge, or long life.
Kitsune are commonly portrayed as lovers, usually in stories involving a young human male and a kitsune who takes the form of a human woman.
The kitsune may be a seductress, but these stories are more often romantic in nature.