Virus
Virus
A virus is a small infectious agent that replicates only inside the living cells of other organisms.
Viruses can infect all types of life forms, from animals and plants to microorganisms, including bacteria and archaea.
Viruses are found in almost every ecosystem on Earth and are the most abundant type of biological entity.
The study of viruses is known as virology, a sub-speciality of microbiology.
While not inside an infected cell or in the process of infecting a cell, viruses exist in the form of independent particles.
Most virus species have virions that are too small to be seen with an optical microscope.
In evolution, viruses are an important means of horizontal gene transfer, which increases genetic diversity.
Viruses are considered by some to be a life form, because they carry genetic material, reproduce, and evolve through natural selection.
Viruses in plants are often transmitted from plant to plant by insects that feed on plant sap, such as aphids.
Viruses in animals can be carried by blood-sucking insects. These disease-bearing organisms are known as vectors.
Influenza viruses are spread by coughing and sneezing.
The range of host cells that a virus can infect is called its "host range".
Viral infections in animals provoke an immune response that usually eliminates the infecting virus.
Antibiotics have no effect on viruses, but several antiviral drugs have been developed.
Viruses are found wherever there is life and have probably existed since living cells first evolved.
The origin of viruses is unclear because they do not form fossils.
Viruses display a wide diversity of shapes and sizes, called morphologies.
In general, viruses are much smaller than bacteria.
Most viruses that have been studied have a diameter between 20 and 300 nanometres.
Some filoviruses have a total length of up to 1400 nm; their diameters are only about 80 nm.
Most viruses cannot be seen with an optical microscope so scanning and transmission electron microscopes are used to visualise virions.
A complete virus particle, known as a virion, consists of nucleic acid surrounded by a protective coat of protein called a capsid.
Viruses can have a lipid "envelope" derived from the host cell membrane.
A virus has either a DNA or an RNA genome and is called a DNA virus or an RNA virus, respectively.
The vast majority of viruses have RNA genomes.
Plant viruses tend to have single-stranded RNA genomes and bacteriophages tend to have double-stranded DNA genomes.
Among RNA viruses and certain DNA viruses, the genome is often divided up into separate parts, in which case it is called segmented.
Replication of viruses involves primarily multiplication of the genome.
The range of structural and biochemical effects that viruses have on the host cell is extensive.
Some viruses cause no apparent changes to the infected cell.
Cells in which the virus is latent and inactive show few signs of infection and often function normally.
Viruses are by far the most abundant biological entities on Earth and they outnumber all the others put together.
Examples of common human diseases caused by viruses include the common cold, influenza, chickenpox, and cold sores.
Viruses have different mechanisms by which they produce disease in an organism, which depends largely on the viral species.