Asteroid_belt
Asteroid belt
The asteroid belt is the circumstellar disc in the Solar System located roughly between the orbits of the planets Mars and Jupiter.
The asteroid belt is occupied by numerous irregularly shaped bodies called asteroids or minor planets.
The total mass of the asteroid belt is approximately 4% that of the Moon.
Ceres, the asteroid belt's only dwarf planet, is about 950 km in diameter.
The asteroid material is so thinly distributed that numerous unmanned spacecraft have traversed it without incident.
The asteroid belt formed from the primordial solar nebula as a group of planetesimals.
The expression "asteroid belt" came into use in the very early 1850s, although it is hard to pinpoint who coined the term.
A total of 1,000 asteroids had been found by 1921, 10,000 by 1981, and 100,000 by 2000.
Modern asteroid survey systems now use automated means to locate new minor planets in ever-increasing quantities.
Today, most scientists accept that, rather than fragmenting from a progenitor planet, the asteroids never formed a planet at all.
Planetesimals within the region which would become the asteroid belt were too strongly perturbed by Jupiter's gravity to form a planet.
The asteroids are not samples of the primordial Solar System.
Some scientists refer to the asteroids as residual planetesimals, other scientists consider them distinct.
The current asteroid belt is believed to contain only a small fraction of the mass of the primordial belt.
Computer simulations suggest that the original asteroid belt may have contained mass equivalent to the Earth.
Contrary to popular imagery, the asteroid belt is mostly empty.
The asteroids are spread over such a large volume that it would be improbable to reach an asteroid without aiming carefully.
Hundreds of thousands of asteroids are currently known, and the total number ranges in the millions or more, depending on the lower size cutoff.
Over 200 asteroids are known to be larger than 100 km.
The apparent magnitudes of most of the known asteroids are 11–19, with the median at about 16.
The asteroid belt has 0.7–1.7 million asteroids with a diameter of 1 km or more.
The total mass of the asteroid belt is estimated to be 2.8×1021 to 3.2×1021 kilograms, which is just 4% of the mass of the Moon.
The four largest objects account for half of the belt's total mass, with almost one-third accounted for by Ceres alone.
Carbonaceous asteroids, as their name suggests, are carbon-rich. They dominate the asteroid belt's outer regions.
S-type (silicate-rich) asteroids are more common toward the inner region of the belt, within 2.5 AU of the Sun.
M-type (metal-rich) asteroids form about 10% of the total population; their spectra resemble that of iron-nickel.
One mystery of the asteroid belt is the relative rarity of V-type, or basaltic asteroids.
The temperature of the asteroid belt varies with the distance from the Sun.
Several otherwise unremarkable bodies in the outer belt show cometary activity.
Most asteroids within the asteroid belt have orbital eccentricities of less than 0.4, and an inclination of less than 30°.
The orbital distribution of the asteroids reaches a maximum at an eccentricity of around 0.07 and an inclination below 4°.
Sometimes, the term main belt is used to refer only to the more compact "core" region where the greatest concentration of bodies is found.
The asteroid belt may also be divided into the inner and outer belts.
Collisions between main-belt bodies with a mean radius of 10 km are expected to occur about once every 10 million years.
A collision may fragment an asteroid into numerous smaller pieces (leading to the formation of a new asteroid family).
Collisions that occur at low relative speeds may also join two asteroids.
Some of the debris from collisions can form meteoroids that enter the Earth's atmosphere.
Of the 50,000 meteorites found on Earth to date, 99.8 percent are believed to have originated in the asteroid belt.
Approximately one-third of the asteroids in the asteroid belt are members of an asteroid family.
Some asteroid families have formed recently, in astronomical terms.
Most belt asteroids imaged to date have come from brief flyby opportunities by probes headed for other targets.