DNA
DNA
DNA is a molecule that carries the genetic instructions used in the growth, development, functioning and reproduction of all known living organisms and many viruses.
DNA and RNA are one of the four major types of macromolecules that are essential for all known forms of life.
Most DNA molecules consist of two biopolymer strands coiled around each other to form a double helix.
The two DNA strands are termed polynucleotides since they are composed of simpler monomer units called nucleotides.
DNA stores biological information.
The DNA backbone is resistant to cleavage, and both strands of the double-stranded structure store the same biological information.
A large part of DNA (more than 98% for humans) is non-coding, meaning that these sections do not serve as patterns for protein sequences.
The two strands of DNA run in opposite directions to each other and are thus antiparallel.
RNA strands are created using DNA strands as a template in a process called transcription.
Within eukaryotic cells, DNA is organized into long structures called chromosomes.
During cell division chromosomes are duplicated in the process of DNA replication, providing each cell its own complete set of chromosomes.
DNA is used by researchers as a molecular tool to explore physical laws and theories, such as the ergodic theorem and the theory of elasticity.
The unique material properties of DNA have made it an attractive molecule for material scientists and engineers interested in micro- and nano-fabrication.
DNA is a long polymer made from repeating units called nucleotides.
In living organisms DNA does not usually exist as a single molecule, but instead as a pair of molecules that are held tightly together.
The backbone of the DNA strand is made from alternating phosphate and sugar residues.
The DNA double helix is stabilized primarily by two forces: hydrogen bonds between nucleotides and base-stacking interactions among aromatic nucleobases.
In addition to RNA and DNA, many artificial nucleic acid analogues have been created to study the properties of nucleic acids, or for use in biotechnology.
In a DNA double helix, each type of nucleobase on one strand bonds with just one type of nucleobase on the other strand.
The two strands of DNA in a double helix can be pulled apart like a zipper, either by a mechanical force or high temperature.
DNA can be twisted like a rope in a process called DNA supercoiling.
If the DNA is twisted in the direction of the helix, this is positive supercoiling, and the bases are held more tightly together.
At the ends of the linear chromosomes are specialized regions of DNA called telomeres.
Branched DNA can be used in nanotechnology to construct geometric shapes.
The expression of genes is influenced by how the DNA is packaged in chromosomes, in a structure called chromatin.
DNA can be damaged by many sorts of mutagens, which change the DNA sequence.
DNA usually occurs as linear chromosomes in eukaryotes, and circular chromosomes in prokaryotes.
The set of chromosomes in a cell makes up its genome; the human genome has approximately 3 billion base pairs of DNA arranged into 46 chromosomes.
The information carried by DNA is held in the sequence of pieces of DNA called genes.
Genomic DNA is tightly and orderly packed in the process called DNA condensation, to fit the small available volumes of the cell.
In eukaryotes, DNA is located in the cell nucleus, with small amounts in mitochondria and chloroplasts.
In prokaryotes, the DNA is held within an irregularly shaped body in the cytoplasm called the nucleoid.
A gene is a unit of heredity and is a region of DNA that influences a particular characteristic in an organism.
Only about 1.5% of the human genome consists of protein-coding exons, with over 50% of human DNA consisting of non-coding repetitive sequences.
Some noncoding DNA sequences play structural roles in chromosomes.
An abundant form of noncoding DNA in humans are pseudogenes, which are copies of genes that have been disabled by mutation.
A gene is a sequence of DNA that contains genetic information and can influence the phenotype of an organism.
Within a gene, the sequence of bases along a DNA strand defines a messenger RNA sequence, which then defines one or more protein sequences.
All the functions of DNA depend on interactions with proteins.
Structural proteins that bind DNA are well-understood examples of non-specific DNA-protein interactions.
Within chromosomes, DNA is held in complexes with structural proteins. These proteins organize the DNA into a compact structure called chromatin.
Enzymes called DNA ligases can rejoin cut or broken DNA strands. They are also used in DNA repair and genetic recombination.
In DNA replication, DNA-dependent DNA polymerases make copies of DNA polynucleotide chains.
Many DNA polymerases have a proofreading activity.
Chromosomal crossover is when two DNA helices break, swap a section and then rejoin.
Genetic recombination can be involved in DNA repair, particularly in the cell's response to double-strand breaks.
DNA contains the genetic information that allows all modern living things to function, grow and reproduce.
Forensic scientists can use DNA in blood, skin, saliva or hair found at a crime scene to identify a matching DNA of an individual, such as a perpetrator.