Galaxy
Galaxy
Starburst galaxies are characterized by dusty concentrations of gas and the appearance of newly formed stars.
A portion of the observable galaxies are classified as an active galaxy if the galaxy contains an active galactic nucleus.
The standard model for an active galactic nucleus is based upon an accretion disc that forms around a supermassive black hole at the core region of the galaxy.
The radiation from an active galactic nucleus results from the gravitational energy of matter as it falls toward the black hole from the disc.
Quasars or quasi-stellar radio sources are the most energetic and distant members of a class of objects called active galactic nuclei.
Quasars are extremely luminous and were first identified as being high redshift sources of electromagnetic energy, including radio waves and visible light.
Galaxies have galactic magnetic fields.
Galactic formation and evolution is an active area of research in astrophysics.
Current cosmological models of the early Universe are based on the Big Bang theory.
About 300,000 years after the Big Bang, atoms of hydrogen and helium began to form, in an event called recombination.
The detailed process by which early galaxies formed is an open question in astrophysics.
Spiral galaxies, like the Milky Way, produce new generations of stars as long as they have dense molecular clouds of interstellar hydrogen in their spiral arms.
The current era of star formation is expected to continue for up to one hundred billion years.
Deep sky surveys show that galaxies are often found in groups and clusters.
Solitary galaxies that have not significantly interacted with another galaxy of comparable mass during the past billion years are relatively scarce.
Isolated galaxies can produce stars at a higher rate than normal, as their gas is not being stripped by other nearby galaxies.
On the largest scale, the Universe is continually expanding, resulting in an average increase in the separation between individual galaxies.
Most galaxies in the Universe are gravitationally bound to a number of other galaxies.
A group of galaxies is the most common type of galactic cluster, and these formations contain a majority of the galaxies in the Universe.
Clusters of galaxies consist of hundreds to thousands of galaxies bound together by gravity.
Clusters of galaxies are often dominated by a single giant elliptical galaxy, known as the brightest cluster galaxy.
Superclusters contain tens of thousands of galaxies, which are found in clusters, groups and sometimes individually.
The Milky Way galaxy is a member of an association named the Local Group, a relatively small group of galaxies that has a diameter of approximately one megaparsec.
The peak radiation of most stars lies in the visible spectrum, so the observation of the stars that form galaxies has been a major component of optical astronomy.
The dust present in the interstellar medium is opaque to visual light.
The first non-visual study of galaxies, particularly active galaxies, was made using radio frequencies.
The existence of supermassive black holes at the cores of galaxies was confirmed through X-ray astronomy.
In 1936 Hubble produced a classification of galactic morphology that is used to this day.
Beginning in the 1990s, the Hubble Space Telescope yielded improved observations.
Among other things, Hubble data helped establish that the missing dark matter in our galaxy cannot solely consist of inherently faint and small stars.