Virus
Virus
Although viruses cause disruption of healthy homeostasis, resulting in disease, they may exist relatively harmlessly within an organism.
Viral epidemiology is the branch of medical science that deals with the transmission and control of virus infections in humans.
Transmission of viruses can be vertical, which means from mother to child, or horizontal, which means from person to person.
Horizontal transmission is the most common mechanism of spread of viruses in populations.
The body's first line of defence against viruses is the innate immune system.
RNA interference is an important innate defence against viruses.
When the adaptive immune system of a vertebrate encounters a virus, it produces specific antibodies that bind to the virus and often render it non-infectious.
Vaccination is a cheap and effective way of preventing infections by viruses.
Vaccines were used to prevent viral infections long before the discovery of the actual viruses.
Viruses infect all cellular life and, although viruses occur universally, each cellular species has its own specific range that often infect only that species.
Some viruses, called satellites, can replicate only within cells that have already been infected by another virus.
There are many types of plant virus, but often they cause only a loss of yield, and it is not economically viable to try to control them.
Plant viruses are often spread from plant to plant by organisms, known as vectors.
Plant viruses cannot infect humans and other animals because they can reproduce only in living plant cells.
Plants have elaborate and effective defence mechanisms against viruses. One of the most effective is the presence of so-called resistance (R) genes.
When they are infected, plants often produce natural disinfectants that kill viruses, such as salicylic acid, nitric oxide, and reactive oxygen molecules.
Plant virus particles or virus-like particles (VLPs) have applications in both biotechnology and nanotechnology.
A teaspoon of seawater contains about one million viruses.
Viruses are the main agents responsible for the rapid destruction of harmful algal blooms, which often kill other marine life.
The number of viruses in the oceans decreases further offshore and deeper into the water, where there are fewer host organisms.
Viruses are an important natural means of transferring genes between different species, which increases genetic diversity and drives evolution.
It is thought that viruses played a central role in the early evolution, at the time of the last universal common ancestor of life on Earth.
Viruses are still one of the largest reservoirs of unexplored genetic diversity on Earth.
Viruses are important to the study of molecular and cell biology as they provide simple systems that can be used to manipulate and investigate the functions of cells.
The study and use of viruses have provided valuable information about aspects of cell biology.
Viruses have been useful in the study of genetics and helped our understanding of the basic mechanisms of molecular genetics.
Geneticists often use viruses as vectors to introduce genes into cells that they are studying.
Virotherapy involves the use of genetically modified viruses to treat diseases.
Viruses have been modified by scientists to reproduce in cancer cells and destroy them but not infect healthy cells.
Current trends in nanotechnology promise to make much more versatile use of viruses.
From the viewpoint of a materials scientist, viruses can be regarded as organic nanoparticles.
Viruses are commonly used in materials science as scaffolds for covalently linked surface modifications.
A particular quality of viruses is that they can be tailored by directed evolution.
Because of their size, shape, and well-defined chemical structures, viruses have been used as templates for organising materials on the nanoscale.
The ability of viruses to cause devastating epidemics in human societies has led to the concern that viruses could be weaponised for biological warfare.