Atom
Atom
An atom is the smallest constituent unit of ordinary matter that has the properties of a chemical element.
Every solid, liquid, gas, and plasma is composed of neutral or ionized atoms.
Atoms are very small; typical sizes are around 100 pm (a ten-billionth of a meter, in the short scale).
Atoms do not have well-defined boundaries, and there are different ways to define their size that give different but close values.
Through the development of physics, atomic models have incorporated quantum principles to better explain and predict the behavior.
Every atom is composed of a nucleus and one or more electrons bound to the nucleus.
Protons and neutrons are called nucleons. More than 99.94% of an atom's mass is in the nucleus.
If the number of protons and electrons are equal, that atom is electrically neutral.
If an atom has more or fewer electrons than protons, then it has an overall negative or positive charge, respectively, and it is called an ion.
The electrons of an atom are attracted to the protons in an atomic nucleus by this electromagnetic force.
The number of protons in the nucleus defines to what chemical element the atom belongs: for example, all copper atoms contain 29 protons.
The number of electrons influences the magnetic properties of an atom.
Atoms can attach to one or more other atoms by chemical bonds to form chemical compounds such as molecules.
The word "atom" was coined by ancient Greek philosophers.
The development of the mass spectrometer allowed the mass of atoms to be measured with increased accuracy.
The constituent particles of an atom are the electron, the proton and the neutron; all three are fermions.
The number of protons in an atom is called its atomic number.
All the bound protons and neutrons in an atom make up a tiny atomic nucleus, and are collectively called nucleons.
The number of protons and neutrons in the atomic nucleus can be modified, although this can require very high energies because of the strong force.
Nuclear fusion occurs when multiple atomic particles join to form a heavier nucleus, such as through the energetic collision of two nuclei.
The electrons in an atom are attracted to the protons in the nucleus by the electromagnetic force.
Each atomic orbital corresponds to a particular energy level of the electron.
Atoms are electrically neutral if they have an equal number of protons and electrons.
Atoms that have either a deficit or a surplus of electrons are called ions.
Electrons that are farthest from the nucleus may be transferred to other nearby atoms or shared between atoms.
Atoms are able to bond into molecules and other types of chemical compounds like ionic and covalent network crystals.
By definition, any two atoms with an identical number of protons in their nuclei belong to the same chemical element.
Atoms with equal numbers of protons but a different number of neutrons are different isotopes of the same element.
The large majority of an atom's mass comes from the protons and neutrons that make it up.
The total number of these particles (called "nucleons") in a given atom is called the mass number.
As even the most massive atoms are far too light to work with directly, chemists instead use the unit of moles.
One mole of atoms of any element always has the same number of atoms.
Atoms lack a well-defined outer boundary, so their dimensions are usually described in terms of an atomic radius.
When subjected to external forces, like electrical fields, the shape of an atom may deviate from spherical symmetry.
Atomic dimensions are thousands of times smaller than the wavelengths of light (400–700 nm) so they cannot be viewed using an optical microscope.
Individual atoms can be observed using a scanning tunneling microscope.
To visualize the minuteness of the atom, consider that a typical human hair is about 1 million carbon atoms in width.
A single drop of water contains about 2 sextillion atoms of oxygen, and twice the number of hydrogen atoms.
If an apple were magnified to the size of the Earth, then the atoms in the apple would be approximately the size of the original apple.
Some atoms can have multiple electron configurations with the same energy level, which thus appear as a single spectral line.
Atoms tend to chemically react with each other in a manner that fills (or empties) their outer valence shells.
The scanning tunneling microscope is a device for viewing surfaces at the atomic level.
An atom can be ionized by removing one of its electrons.
The electric charge causes the trajectory of an atom to bend when it passes through a magnetic field.
The radius by which the trajectory of a moving ion is turned by the magnetic field is determined by the mass of the atom.
Atoms can combine to create materials that do not consist of discrete molecules, including crystals and liquid or solid metals.