Vampire
Vampire
A vampire is a being from folklore who subsists by feeding on the life essence (generally in the form of blood) of the living.
In European folklore, vampires were undead beings that often visited loved ones and caused mischief or deaths in the neighbourhoods.
Although vampiric entities have been recorded in most cultures, the term vampire was not popularized in the West until the early 18th century.
Cultures such as the Mesopotamians, Hebrews, Ancient Greeks, and Romans had tales of demons and spirits which are considered precursors to modern vampires.
Vampires are revenants of evil beings or suicide victims, but they can also be created by a malevolent spirit possessing a corpse or by being bitten by a vampire.
It is difficult to make a single, definitive description of the folkloric vampire, though there are several elements common to many European legends.
Vampires were usually reported as bloated in appearance, and ruddy, purplish, or dark in colour.
Although vampires were generally described as undead, some folktales spoke of them as living beings.
The causes of vampiric generation were many and varied in original folklore.
In Slavic and Chinese traditions, any corpse that was jumped over by an animal, particularly a dog or a cat, was feared to become one of the undead.
In Russian folklore, vampires were said to have once been witches or people who had rebelled against the Russian Orthodox Church while they were alive.
Many elaborate rituals were used to identify a vampire.
Holes appearing in the earth over a grave were taken as a sign of vampirism.
Corpses thought to be vampires were generally described as having a healthier appearance than expected, plump and showing little or no signs of decomposition.
Folkloric vampires could also make their presence felt by engaging in minor poltergeist-like activity, such as hurling stones on roofs or moving household objects.
Vampires are said to be unable to walk on consecrated ground, such as that of churches or temples, or cross running water.
Mirrors have been used to ward off vampires when placed, facing outwards, on a door.
In some cultures, vampires do not have a reflection and sometimes do not cast a shadow, perhaps as a manifestation of the vampire's lack of a soul.
Some traditions also hold that a vampire cannot enter a house unless invited by the owner, although after the first invitation they can come and go as they please.
Though folkloric vampires were believed to be more active at night, they were not generally considered vulnerable to sunlight.
The vampire's head, body, or clothes could also be spiked and pinned to the earth to prevent rising.
Many myths surrounding vampires originated during the medieval period.
The Old Norse draugr is another medieval example of an undead creature with similarities to vampires.
Vampires proper originate in folklore widely reported from Eastern Europe in the late 17th and 18th centuries.
Aloe vera hung backwards behind or near a door was thought to ward off vampiric beings in South American superstition.
During the late 18th and 19th centuries the belief in vampires was widespread in parts of New England.
Although vampires have appeared in Japanese cinema since the late 1950s, the folklore behind it is western in origin.
In modern fiction, the vampire tends to be depicted as a suave, charismatic villain.
Despite the general disbelief in vampiric entities, occasional sightings of vampires are reported.
Vampire hunting societies still exist, although they are largely formed for social reasons.
In early 1970 local press spread rumours that a vampire haunted Highgate Cemetery in London. Amateur vampire hunters flocked in large numbers to the cemetery.
In some cases, especially in small localities, vampire superstition is still rampant and sightings or claims of vampire attacks occur frequently.
Vampirism and the Vampire lifestyle also represent a relevant part of modern day's occultist movements.
It has also been hypothesized that vampire legends were influenced by individuals being buried alive because of shortcomings in the medical knowledge of the time.
The reinvention of the vampire myth in the modern era is not without political overtones.
Vampire bats were only integrated into vampire folklore when they were discovered on the South American mainland in the 16th century.
The vampire is now a fixture in popular fiction.
Implied though not often explicitly documented in folklore, immortality is one attribute which features heavily in vampire film and literature.
The latter part of the 20th century saw the rise of multi-volume vampire epics.
Considered one of the preeminent figures of the classic horror film, the vampire has proven to be a rich subject for the film and gaming industries.
The role-playing game Vampire: the Masquerade has been influential upon modern vampire fiction and elements of its terminology, such as embrace and sire.