Blue_whale
Blue whale
Long and slender, the blue whale's body can be various shades of bluish-grey dorsally and somewhat lighter underneath.
Blue whales were abundant in nearly all the oceans on Earth until the beginning of the twentieth century.
For over a century, blue whales were hunted almost to extinction by whalers until protected by the international community in 1966.
A 2002 report estimated there were 5,000 to 12,000 blue whales worldwide, in at least five groups.
There are probably between 10,000 and 25,000 blue whales worldwide today.
There have been at least 11 documented cases of blue whale-fin whale hybrid adults in the wild.
The blue whale has a long tapering body that appears stretched in comparison with the stockier build of other whales.
When surfacing to breathe, the blue whale raises its shoulder and blowhole out of the water to a greater extent than other large whales,
Some blue whales in the North Atlantic and North Pacific raise their tail fluke when diving.
When breathing, the blue whale emits a vertical single-column spout, typically 9 metres (30 ft) high, but reaching up to 12 metres (39 ft).
Blue whales have twin blowholes shielded by a large splashguard.
Blue whales can reach speeds of 50 kilometres per hour (31 mph) over short bursts.
Blue whales typically swim at a depth of about 13 meters (42.5 feet) when migrating in order to eliminate drag from surface waves.
Blue whales most commonly live alone or with one other individual.
In locations where there is a high concentration of food, as many as 50 blue whales have been seen scattered over a small area.
The blue whale is the largest animal ever known to have lived.
Blue whales are difficult to weigh because of their size.
Due to its large size, several organs of the blue whale are the largest in the animal kingdom.
The heart of an average sized blue whale weighs 400 pounds (180 kg) and is the largest known in any animal.
During the first seven months of its life, a blue whale calf drinks approximately 380 litres (100 US gal) of milk every day.
Blue whale calves gain weight quickly, as much as 90 kilograms (200 lb) every 24 hours.
An adult blue whale can eat up to 40 million krill in a day.
The whales always feed in the areas with the highest concentration of krill, sometimes eating up to 3,600 kilograms (7,900 lb) of krill in a single day.
The daily energy requirement of an adult blue whale is in the region of 1.5 million kilocalories (6.3 GJ).
The blue whale also incidentally consumes small fish, crustaceans and squid caught up with krill.
The weight of individual blue whales varies significantly according to fat condition.
Scientists estimate that blue whales can live for at least 80 years.
Blue whales are not easy to catch or kill.
Due to their enormous size, power and speed, adult blue whales have virtually no natural predators.
Blue whales may be wounded, sometimes fatally, after colliding with ocean vessels, as well as becoming trapped or entangled in fishing gear.
Before modern whaling began the late 19th century, blue whales were obscure and very poorly understood.