Tornado
Tornado
A tornado is a violently rotating column of air that rotates while in contact with both the surface of the Earth and a cumulonimbus cloud.
Tornadoes are often referred to as twisters or cyclones, although the word cyclone is used in meteorology to name any closed low pressure circulation.
Tornadoes come in many shapes and sizes, but they are typically in the form of a visible condensation funnel.
Most tornadoes have wind speeds less than 110 miles per hour (180 km/h), are about 250 feet (80 m) across, and travel a few miles (several kilometers) before dissipating.
The most extreme tornadoes can attain wind speeds of more than 300 miles per hour (480 km/h), are more than two miles (3 km) in diameter.
Various types of tornadoes include the landspout, multiple vortex tornado, and waterspout.
Waterspouts are characterized by a spiraling funnel-shaped wind current, connecting to a large cumulus or cumulonimbus cloud.
Tornadoes have been observed and documented on every continent except Antarctica.
However, the vast majority of tornadoes occur in the Tornado Alley region of the United States, although they can occur nearly anywhere in North America.
There are several scales for rating the strength of tornadoes.
The word tornado is an altered form of the Spanish word tronada, which means "thunderstorm".
For a vortex to be classified as a tornado, it must be in contact with both the ground and the cloud base.
Tornadoes often begin as funnel clouds with no associated strong winds at the surface, and not all funnel clouds evolve into tornadoes.
Most tornadoes produce strong winds at the surface while the visible funnel is still above the ground.
Occasionally, a single storm will produce more than one tornado, either simultaneously or in succession.
Multiple tornadoes produced by the same storm cell are referred to as a "tornado family".
Several tornadoes are sometimes spawned from the same large-scale storm system.
Most tornadoes take on the appearance of a narrow funnel, a few hundred yards (meters) across, with a small cloud of debris near the ground.
Tornadoes may be obscured completely by rain or dust. These tornadoes are especially dangerous, as even experienced meteorologists might not see them.
Tornadoes can appear in many shapes and sizes.
Small, relatively weak landspouts may be visible only as a small swirl of dust on the ground.
A tornado with a nearly cylindrical profile and relative low height is sometimes referred to as a "stovepipe" tornado.
Large single-vortex tornadoes can look like large wedges stuck into the ground, and so are known as "wedge tornadoes" or "wedges".
Tornadoes in the dissipating stage can resemble narrow tubes or ropes, and often curl or twist into complex shapes.
In the United States, tornadoes are around 500 feet (150 m) across on average and travel on the ground for 5 miles (8.0 km).
Weak tornadoes, or strong yet dissipating tornadoes, can be exceedingly narrow, sometimes only a few feet or couple meters across.
One tornado was reported to have a damage path only 7 feet (2 m) long.
Tornadoes can have a wide range of colors, depending on the environment in which they form.
While traveling over a body of water (as a waterspout), tornadoes can turn very white or even blue.
Lighting conditions are a major factor in the appearance of a tornado.
A tornado which is "back-lit" appears very dark. The same tornado, viewed with the sun at the observer's back, may appear gray or brilliant white.
Tornadoes which occur near the time of sunset can be many different colors, appearing in hues of yellow, orange, and pink.
Dust kicked up by the winds of the parent thunderstorm, heavy rain and hail, and the darkness of night are all factors which can reduce the visibility of tornadoes.
Most significant tornadoes form under the storm's updraft base, which is rain-free, making them visible.
Most tornadoes occur in the late afternoon, when the bright sun can penetrate even the thickest clouds.
Night-time tornadoes are often illuminated by frequent lightning.
Lightning is said to be the source of illumination for those who claim to have seen the interior of a tornado.
Tornadoes normally rotate cyclonically (when viewed from above, this is counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere and clockwise in the southern).
Approximately 1 percent of tornadoes rotate in an anticyclonic direction in the northern hemisphere.
Tornadoes emit widely on the acoustics spectrum and the sounds are caused by multiple mechanisms.
Various sounds of tornadoes have been reported, mostly related to familiar sounds for the witness and generally some variation of a whooshing roar.
Many tornadoes are not audible from much distance; the nature and propagation distance of the audible sound depends on atmospheric conditions and topography.
The winds of the tornado vortex and of constituent turbulent eddies, as well as airflow interaction with the surface and debris, contribute to the sounds.
Since many tornadoes are audible only when very near, sound is not reliable warning of a tornado.