Raccoon
Raccoon
Two of the raccoon's most distinctive features are its extremely dexterous front paws and its facial mask.
Raccoons are noted for their intelligence, with studies showing that they are able to remember the solution to tasks for up to three years.
The diet of the omnivorous raccoon, which is usually nocturnal, consists of about 40% invertebrates, 33% plant foods, and 27% vertebrates.
As a result of escapes and deliberate introductions in the mid-20th century, raccoons are now also distributed across mainland Europe and Japan.
Though previously thought to be solitary, there is now evidence that raccoons engage in gender-specific social behavior.
At the beginning of winter, a raccoon can weigh twice as much as in spring because of fat storage.
The largest recorded wild raccoon weighed 28.4 kg (62.6 lb) and measured 140 cm (55 in) in total length.
The most characteristic physical feature of the raccoon is the area of black fur around the eyes, which contrasts sharply with the surrounding white face coloring.
The raccoon, whose method of locomotion is usually considered to be plantigrade, can stand on its hind legs to examine objects with its front paws.
As raccoons have short legs compared to their compact torso, they are usually not able either to run quickly or jump great distances.
Raccoons can swim with an average speed of about 5 km/h (3 mph) and can stay in the water for several hours.
For climbing down a tree headfirst — an unusual ability for a mammal of its size — a raccoon rotates its hind feet so they are pointing backwards.
Raccoons have a dual cooling system to regulate their temperature; that is, they are able to both sweat and pant for heat dissipation.
Raccoon skulls have a short and wide facial region and a voluminous braincase.
The most important sense for the raccoon is its sense of touch.
The raccoon's paws lack an opposable thumb; thus, it does not have the agility of the hands of primates.
Raccoons are thought to be color blind or at least poorly able to distinguish color, though their eyes are well-adapted for sensing green light.
The shape and size of a raccoon's home range varies depending on age, sex, and habitat, with adults claiming areas more than twice as large as juveniles.
Though usually nocturnal, the raccoon is sometimes active in daylight to take advantage of available food sources.
Contrary to popular belief, raccoons only occasionally eat active or large prey, such as birds and mammals.
When food is plentiful, raccoons can develop strong individual preferences for specific foods.
In the northern parts of their range, raccoons go into a winter rest, reducing their activity drastically as long as a permanent snow cover makes searching for food impossible.
In the wild, raccoons often dabble for underwater food near the shore-line.
Captive raccoons have been known to live for more than 20 years.
Although they have thrived in sparsely wooded areas in the last decades, raccoons depend on vertical structures to climb when they feel threatened.
About 1,240 raccoons were released in nine regions of the former Soviet Union between 1936 and 1958 for the purpose of establishing a population to be hunted for their fur.
In Japan, up to 1,500 raccoons were imported as pets each year after the success of the anime series Rascal the Raccoon (1977).
By 2012 it was estimated that Germany now had more than a million raccoons.
The raccoon was a protected species in Germany, but has been declared a game animal in 14 states since 1954.
Experiments in acclimatising raccoons into the USSR began in 1936, and were repeated a further 25 times until 1962.
The range of Soviet raccoons was never single or continuous, as they were often introduced to different locations far from each other.
Due to its adaptability, the raccoon has been able to use urban areas as a habitat.
In small towns and suburbs, many raccoons sleep in a nearby forest after foraging in the settlement area.
The increasing number of raccoons in urban areas has resulted in diverse reactions in humans, ranging from outrage at their presence to deliberate feeding.
Among all fruits and crops cultivated in agricultural areas, sweet corn in its milk stage is particularly popular among raccoons.
Like other predators, raccoons searching for food can break into poultry houses to feed on chickens, ducks, their eggs, or feed.
Since raccoons in high mortality areas have a higher rate of reproduction, extensive hunting may not solve problems with raccoon populations.
In the mythology of the indigenous peoples of the Americas, the raccoon is the subject of folk tales.
In some tales, the raccoon played the role of the trickster which outsmarts other animals, like coyotes and wolves.
The raccoon appears in Native American art across a wide geographic range.
In Western culture, several autobiographical novels about living with a raccoon have been written, mostly for children.
The fur of raccoons is used for clothing, especially for coats and coonskin caps.
While primarily hunted for their fur, raccoons were also a source of food for Native Americans and early American settlers.
Raccoons are sometimes kept as pets, which is discouraged by many experts because the raccoon is not a domesticated species.
Raccoons may act unpredictably and aggressively and it is usually impossible to teach them to obey commands.