Earth
Earth
Earth is the third planet from the Sun, the densest planet in the Solar System, the largest of the Solar System's four terrestrial planets.
According to radiometric dating and other sources of evidence, Earth formed about 4.54 billion years ago.
Earth gravitationally interacts with other objects in space, especially the Sun and the Moon.
During one orbit around the Sun, Earth rotates about its own axis 366.26 times, creating 365.26 solar days or one sidereal year.
Life arose on Earth by 3.5 billion years ago, though some geological evidence indicates that life may have arisen as much as 4.1 billion years ago.
In the history of the Earth, biodiversity has gone through long durations of expansion, but occasionally punctuated by mass extinction events.
Over 99% of all species of life that ever lived on Earth are extinct.
Originally, earth was written in lowercase, and from early Middle English, its definite sense as "the globe" was expressed as the earth.
By early Modern English, many nouns were capitalized, and the earth became the Earth, particularly when referenced along with other heavenly bodies.
Earth's atmosphere and oceans were formed by volcanic activity and outgassing that included water vapor.
A crust formed when the molten outer layer of Earth cooled to form a solid as the accumulated water vapor began to act in the atmosphere.
Earth's long-term future is closely tied to that of the Sun.
A 2008 simulation indicates that Earth's orbit will eventually decay due to tidal effects and drag, causing it to enter the Sun's atmosphere and be vaporized.
The shape of Earth is approximately oblate spheroidal.
Due to rotation, the Earth is flattened along the geographic axis and bulging around the equator.
The diameter of the Earth at the equator to be 43 kilometres (27 mi) larger than the pole-to-pole diameter.
A little more than 47% of Earth's crust consists of oxygen.
Earth's interior, like that of the other terrestrial planets, is divided into layers by their chemical or physical properties.
The Earth's inner core might rotate at a slightly higher angular velocity than the remainder of the planet, advancing by 0.1–0.5° per year.
The radius of the inner core is about one fifth of that of Earth.
Earth's internal heat comes from a combination of residual heat from planetary accretion (about 20%) and heat produced through radioactive decay (80%).
The mechanically rigid outer layer of Earth, the lithosphere, is divided into pieces called tectonic plates.
The pedosphere is the outermost layer of Earth's continental surface and is composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes.
Close to 40% of Earth's land surface is used for cropland and pasture.
The abundance of water on Earth's surface is a unique feature that distinguishes the "Blue Planet" from other planets in the Solar System.
Earth's hydrosphere consists chiefly of the oceans, but technically includes all water surfaces in the world.
The average salinity of Earth's oceans is about 35 grams of salt per kilogram of sea water (3.5% salt).
The atmospheric pressure on Earth's surface averages 101.325 kPa, with a scale height of about 8.5 km.
Earth's biosphere has significantly altered its atmosphere.
Earth's atmosphere has no definite boundary, slowly becoming thinner and fading into outer space.
The amount of solar energy reaching Earth's surface decreases with increasing latitude.
Earth's surface can be subdivided into specific latitudinal belts of approximately homogeneous climate.
The highest air temperature ever measured on Earth was 56.7 °C (134.1 °F) in 1913.
The lowest air temperature ever directly measured on Earth was −89.2 °C (−128.6 °F) in 1983.
The main part of Earth's magnetic field is generated in the core.
The extent of Earth's magnetic field in space defines the magnetosphere.
The Moon and Earth orbit a common barycenter every 27.32 days relative to the background stars.
When combined with the Earth–Moon system's common orbit around the Sun, the period of the synodic month, from new moon to new moon, is 29.53 days.
Viewed from the celestial north pole, the motion of Earth, the Moon, and their axial rotations are all counterclockwise.
Viewed from a vantage point above the north poles of both the Sun and Earth, Earth orbits in a counterclockwise direction about the Sun.
Earth, along with the Solar System, is situated in the Milky Way and orbits about 28,000 light-years from its center.
The axial tilt of the Earth is approximately 23.439281° with the axis of its orbit plane, pointing always towards the Celestial Poles.
Due to Earth's axial tilt, the amount of sunlight reaching any given point on the surface varies over the course of the year.
The angle of Earth's axial tilt is relatively stable over long periods of time.
Earth has resources that have been exploited by humans. Those termed non-renewable resources, such as fossil fuels, only renew over geological timescales.
Large deposits of fossil fuels are obtained from Earth's crust, consisting of coal, petroleum, and natural gas.
Earth's biosphere produces many useful biological products for humans, including food, wood, pharmaceuticals, oxygen, and the recycling of many organic wastes.
Large areas of Earth's surface are subject to extreme weather such as tropical cyclones, hurricanes, or typhoons that dominate life in those areas.
Earth's human population reached approximately seven billion on 31 October 2011.
It is estimated that one-eighth of Earth's surface is suitable for humans to live on.
Three-quarters of Earth's surface is covered by oceans, leaving one quarter as land.
The first human to orbit Earth was Yuri Gagarin on 12 April 1961.