Diamond
Diamond
Diamond is less stable than graphite, but the conversion rate from diamond to graphite is negligible at standard conditions.
Diamond is renowned as a material with superlative physical qualities, most of which originate from the strong covalent bonding between its atoms.
Diamond has the highest hardness and thermal conductivity of any bulk material.
Most natural diamonds are formed at high temperature and pressure at depths of 140 to 190 kilometers (87 to 118 mi) in the Earth's mantle.
Diamonds have been known in India for at least 3,000 years but most likely 6,000 years.
Diamonds have been treasured as gemstones since their use as religious icons in ancient India.
The popularity of diamonds has risen since the 19th century because of increased supply, improved cutting and polishing techniques.
The most familiar uses of diamonds today are as gemstones used for adornment and as industrial abrasives for cutting hard materials.
The dispersion of white light into spectral colors is the primary gemological characteristic of gem diamonds.
Diamonds occur most often as euhedral or rounded octahedra and twinned octahedra known as macles.
Diamond-bearing rock is carried from the mantle to the Earth's surface by deep-origin volcanic eruptions.
Once diamonds have been transported to the surface by magma in a volcanic pipe, they may erode out and be distributed over a large area.
A volcanic pipe containing diamonds is known as a primary source of diamonds.
Not all diamonds found on Earth originated on Earth.
Primitive interstellar meteorites were found to contain carbon possibly in the form of diamond.
Diamonds have been adapted for many uses because of the material's exceptional physical characteristics.
The chemical bonds that hold the carbon atoms in diamonds together are weaker than those in graphite.
In a diamond, each carbon atom is surrounded by neighboring four carbon atoms forming a tetrahedral shaped unit.
Diamond is the hardest known natural material.
Diamond's hardness has been known since antiquity, and is the source of its name.
The hardness of diamond contributes to its suitability as a gemstone.
Diamonds are naturally lipophilic and hydrophobic, which means the diamonds' surface cannot be wet by water but can be easily wet and stuck by oil.
Under room temperature diamonds do not react with any chemical reagents including strong acids and bases.
A diamond's surface can only be oxidized at temperatures above about 850 °C (1,560 °F) in air.
Pure diamond should transmit visible light and appear as a clear colorless crystal.
Colors in diamond originate from lattice defects and impurities.
Virtually any element can be introduced to diamond by ion implantation.
Nitrogen is by far the most common impurity found in gem diamonds and is responsible for the yellow and brown color in diamonds.
Plastic deformation is the cause of color in some brown and perhaps pink and red diamonds.
Colored diamonds contain impurities or structural defects that cause the coloration, while pure or nearly pure diamonds are transparent and colorless.
Diamonds can be identified by their high thermal conductivity.
A large trade in gem-grade diamonds exists.
The production and distribution of diamonds is largely consolidated in the hands of a few key players.
Mined rough diamonds are converted into gems through a multi-step process called "cutting".
Diamonds are extremely hard, but also brittle and can be split up by a single blow.
Diamond cutting is traditionally considered as a delicate procedure requiring skills, scientific knowledge, tools and experience.
After initial cutting, the diamond is shaped in numerous stages of polishing.
Marketing has significantly affected the image of diamond as a valuable commodity.
Industrial use of diamonds has historically been associated with their hardness, which makes diamond the ideal material for cutting and grinding tools.
As the hardest known naturally occurring material, diamond can be used to polish, cut, or wear away any material, including other diamonds.
Only a very small fraction of the diamond ore consists of actual diamonds.
Synthetic diamonds are diamonds manufactured in a laboratory, as opposed to diamonds mined from the Earth.
Diamonds may be etched by laser with marks invisible to the naked eye.