Saturn
Saturn
Saturn is the sixth planet from the Sun and the second-largest in the Solar System, after Jupiter.
Saturn is a gas giant with an average radius about nine times that of Earth.
Although only one-eighth the average density of Earth, with its larger volume Saturn is just over 95 times more massive.
Saturn is named after the Roman god of agriculture; its astronomical symbol (♄) represents the god's sickle.
Saturn's interior is probably composed of a core of iron–nickel and rock (silicon and oxygen compounds).
Saturn has a pale yellow hue due to ammonia crystals in its upper atmosphere.
Saturn's magnetic field strength is around one-twentieth of Jupiter's.
Wind speeds on Saturn can reach 1,800 km/h (500 m/s), higher than on Jupiter, but not as high as those on Neptune.
Saturn has nine continuous main rings and three discontinuous arcs and that is composed mostly of ice particles with a smaller amount of rocky debris and dust.
Sixty-two moons are known to orbit Saturn, of which fifty-three are officially named. This does not include the hundreds of moonlets comprising the rings.
Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and the second-largest in the Solar System, is larger than the planet Mercury, although less massive.
Saturn is a gas giant because it is predominantly composed of hydrogen and helium. It lacks a definite surface, though it may have a solid core.
Saturn's rotation causes it to have the shape of an oblate spheroid; that is, it is flattened at the poles and bulges at its equator.
Saturn is the only planet of the Solar System that is less dense than water—about 30% less.
Jupiter has 318 times the Earth's mass, while Saturn is 95 times the mass of the Earth.
Together, Jupiter and Saturn hold 92% of the total planetary mass in the Solar System.
The temperature, pressure, and density inside Saturn all rise steadily toward the core, which causes hydrogen to transition into a metal in the deeper layers.
Saturn has a hot interior, reaching 11,700 °C at its core, and it radiates 2.5 times more energy into space than it receives from the Sun.
The outer atmosphere of Saturn contains 96.3% molecular hydrogen and 3.25% helium by volume.
Saturn's atmosphere exhibits a banded pattern similar to Jupiter's, but Saturn's bands are much fainter and are much wider near the equator.
Saturn's finer cloud patterns were not observed until the flybys of the Voyager spacecraft during the 1980s.
Saturn's usually bland atmosphere occasionally exhibits long-lived ovals and other features common on Jupiter.
Saturn has an intrinsic magnetic field that has a simple, symmetric shape – a magnetic dipole.
Saturn's magnetosphere, like Earth's, produces aurorae.
The elliptical orbit of Saturn is inclined 2.48° relative to the orbital plane of the Earth.
The visible features on Saturn rotate at different rates depending on latitude and multiple rotation periods have been assigned to various regions.
Titan, the largest moon, comprises more than 90% of the mass in orbit around Saturn, including the rings.
Saturn's second-largest moon, Rhea, may have a tenuous ring system of its own, along with a tenuous atmosphere.
Traditionally, most of Saturn's moons have been named after Titans of Greek mythology.
Titan is the only satellite in the Solar System with a major atmosphere, in which a complex organic chemistry occurs.
Some of the moons of Saturn, including Pandora and Prometheus, act as shepherd moons to confine the rings and prevent them from spreading out.
Pan and Atlas cause weak, linear density waves in Saturn's rings that have yielded more reliable calculations of their masses.
Saturn has been known since prehistoric times.
In ancient times, Saturn was the most distant of the five known planets in the Solar System (excluding Earth) and thus a major character in various mythologies.
Babylonian astronomers systematically observed and recorded the movements of Saturn.
In ancient Roman mythology, the god Saturnus, from which the planet takes its name, was the god of agriculture.
The Romans considered Saturnus the equivalent of the Greek god Cronus.
Saturn's rings require at least a 15-mm-diameter telescope to resolve and thus were not known to exist until Galileo first saw them in 1610.
In November 1980, the Voyager 1 probe visited the Saturn system. It sent back the first high-resolution images of the planet, its rings and satellites.
Saturn is the most distant of the five planets easily visible to the naked eye from Earth, the other four being Mercury, Venus, Mars and Jupiter.
Saturn appears brighter when the rings are angled such that they are more visible.