Japan
Japan
Japan (or Nihon) is an island country in East Asia.
Located in the Pacific Ocean, Japan lies to the east of the Sea of Japan, the East China Sea, China, Korea and Russia.
The kanji that make up Japan's name mean "sun origin", and it is often called the "Land of the Rising Sun".
The four largest islands are Honshu, Hokkaido, Kyushu and Shikoku, which make up about ninety-seven percent of Japan's land area.
The Japan is divided into 47 prefectures in eight regions. The population of 126 million is the world's tenth largest.
Japanese people make up 98.5% of Japan's total population.
Approximately 9.1 million people live in the core city of Tokyo, the capital city of Japan.
Archaeological research indicates that Japan was inhabited as early as the Upper Paleolithic period.
The first written mention of Japan is in Chinese history texts from the 1st century AD.
Influence from other regions, mainly Imperial China, followed by periods of isolation, particularly from Western Europe, has characterized Japan's history.
From the 12th century until 1868, Japan was ruled by successive feudal military shoguns who ruled in the name of the Emperor.
Japan entered into a long period of isolation in the early 17th century, which was ended in 1853 when a United States fleet pressured Japan to open to the West.
Japan is a member of the UN, the G7, the G8, and the G20 and is considered a great power.
The English word Japan possibly derives from the historical Chinese pronunciation.
A Paleolithic culture around 30,000 BC constitutes the first known habitation of the Japanese archipelago.
Japan's feudal era was characterized by the emergence and dominance of a ruling class of warriors, the samurai.
Japan's population grew from 35 million in 1873 to 70 million in 1935.
World War I enabled Japan, on the side of the victorious Allies, to widen its influence and territorial holdings in Asia.
Japan is a constitutional monarchy whereby the power of the Emperor is very limited.
Historically influenced by Chinese law, the Japanese legal system developed independently during the Edo period.
Japan's court system is divided into four basic tiers: the Supreme Court and three levels of lower courts.
Japan has close economic and military relations with the United States; the US-Japan security alliance acts as the cornerstone of the nation's foreign policy.
Japan maintains one of the largest military budgets of any country in the world.
Japan's Self-Defence force is a usual military that has never fired shots outside Japan.
Japan is the highest-ranked Asian country in the Global Peace Index.
Japan consists of 47 prefectures, each overseen by an elected governor, legislature and administrative bureaucracy.
About 73 percent of Japan is forested, mountainous, and unsuitable for agricultural, industrial, or residential use.
Japan is one of the most densely populated countries in the world.
The islands of Japan are located in a volcanic zone on the Pacific Ring of Fire.
Japan was originally attached to the eastern coast of the Eurasian continent.
Japan has 108 active volcanoes.
The climate of Japan is predominantly temperate, but varies greatly from north to south.
Japan's geographical features divide it into six principal climatic zones.
In the Sea of Japan zone on Honshu's west coast, northwest winter winds bring heavy snowfall.
The average winter temperature in Japan is 5.1 °C (41.2 °F) and the average summer temperature is 25.2 °C (77.4 °F).
The highest temperature ever measured in Japan 40.9 °C (105.6 °F) was recorded on August 16, 2007.
Japan has nine forest ecoregions which reflect the climate and geography of the islands.
Japan has over 90,000 species of wildlife, including the brown bear, the Japanese macaque, the Japanese raccoon dog, the Large Japanese Field Mouse, and the Japanese giant salamander.
The oil crisis in 1973 encouraged the efficient use of energy because of Japan's lack of natural resources.
As of June 2015, more than 40 coal-fired power plants are planned or under construction in Japan.
Modern Japan's economic growth began in the Edo period.