Wind
Wind
Wind is the flow of gases on a large scale.
On the surface of the Earth, wind consists of the bulk movement of air.
In outer space, solar wind is the movement of gases or charged particles from the Sun through space.
Planetary wind is the outgassing of light chemical elements from a planet's atmosphere into space.
Winds are commonly classified by their spatial scale, their speed, the types of forces that cause them, the regions in which they occur, and their effect.
The strongest observed winds on a planet in the Solar System occur on Neptune and Saturn.
In meteorology, winds are often referred to according to their strength, and the direction from which the wind is blowing.
Short bursts of high speed wind are termed gusts.
Strong winds of intermediate duration (around one minute) are termed squalls.
Long-duration winds have various names associated with their average strength, such as breeze, gale, storm, and hurricane.
In coastal areas the sea breeze/land breeze cycle can define local winds; in areas that have variable terrain, mountain and valley breezes can dominate local winds.
Wind powers the voyages of sailing ships across Earth's oceans.
Hot air balloons use the wind to take short trips, and powered flight uses it to increase lift and reduce fuel consumption.
Areas of wind shear caused by various weather phenomena can lead to dangerous situations for aircraft.
When winds become strong, trees and man-made structures are damaged or destroyed.
Winds can shape landforms, via a variety of aeolian processes such as the formation of fertile soils, such as loess, and by erosion.
Dust from large deserts can be moved great distances from its source region by the prevailing winds.
Wind affects the spread of wildfires.
Winds can disperse seeds from various plants, enabling the survival and dispersal of those plant species, as well as flying insect populations.
When combined with cold temperatures, wind has a negative impact on livestock.
Wind affects animals' food stores, as well as their hunting and defensive strategies.
Wind is caused by differences in the atmospheric pressure.
When a difference in atmospheric pressure exists, air moves from the higher to the lower pressure area, resulting in winds of various speeds.
Wind direction is usually expressed in terms of the direction from which it originates.
At airports, windsocks indicate wind direction, and can also be used to estimate wind speed by the angle of hang.
Sustained wind speeds are reported globally at a 10 meters (33 ft) height and are averaged over a 10‑minute time frame.
Wind energy is the kinetic energy of the air in motion.
The strongest winds are in the mid-latitudes where cold polar air meets warm air from the tropics.
The trade winds (also called trades) are the prevailing pattern of easterly surface winds found in the tropics towards the Earth's equator.
The trade winds blow predominantly from the northeast in the Northern Hemisphere and from the southeast in the Southern Hemisphere.
The trade winds act as the steering flow for tropical cyclones that form over the world's oceans.
A monsoon is a seasonal prevailing wind that lasts for several months within tropical regions.
In coastal regions, sea breezes and land breezes can be important factors in a location's prevailing winds.
When large-scale winds are calm, the strength of the sea breeze is directly proportional to the temperature difference between the land mass and the sea.
Cool winds accelerating through mountain gaps have been given regional names.
Winds that flow over mountains down into lower elevations are known as downslope winds. These winds are warm and dry.
Wind speeds during downslope wind effect can exceed 160 kilometers per hour (99 mph).
As described earlier, prevailing and local winds are not spread evenly across the earth, which means that wind speeds also differ by region.
As a natural force, the wind was often personified as one or more wind gods or as an expression of the supernatural in many cultures.
Kamikaze is a Japanese word, usually translated as divine wind, believed to be a gift from the gods.
In arid climates, the main source of erosion is wind.
Wind has a very important role in aiding plants and other immobile organisms in dispersal of seeds, spores, pollen, etc.
Although wind is not the primary form of seed dispersal in plants, it provides dispersal for a large percentage of the biomass of land plants.
Erosion can be the result of material movement by the wind.
Wind erosion generally occurs in areas with little or no vegetation, often in areas where there is insufficient rainfall to support vegetation.
There are local names for winds associated with sand and dust storms.
Wind limits tree growth.
When high winds knock down or uproot trees, the process is known as windthrow.
Wind causes the generation of sound.
Even a soft wind will cause a low level of environmental noise. If the wind is blowing harder, it may produce howling sounds of varying frequencies.
Infrequent wind gusts can cause poorly designed suspension bridges to sway.