Canada
Canada
Canada is a country in the northern half of North America.
Canada's border with the United States is the world's longest land border.
The majority of Canada has a cold or severely cold winter climate, but southerly areas are warm in summer.
Canada is sparsely populated, the majority of its land territory being dominated by forest and tundra and the Rocky Mountains.
About four-fifths of the Canada's population of 36 million people is urbanized and live near the southern border.
Canada has been inhabited for millennia by various Aboriginal peoples.
Beginning in the 16th century, British and French claims were made on the area, with the colony of Canada first being established by the French in 1537.
Canada is a federal parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy, with Queen Elizabeth II being the head of state.
Canada is officially bilingual at the federal level.
Canada is one of the world's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations, the product of large-scale immigration from many other countries.
Canada's advanced economy is the eleventh largest in the world, relying chiefly upon its abundant natural resources and well-developed international trade networks.
Canada's long and complex relationship with the United States has had a significant impact on its economy and culture.
Canada is a developed country and has the tenth highest nominal per capita income globally as well as the ninth highest ranking in the Human Development Index.
Canada ranks among the highest in international measurements of government transparency, civil liberties, quality of life, economic freedom, and education.
The Canadas were the main front in the War of 1812 between the United States and Britain. Peace came in 1815; no boundaries were changed.
The Great Depression in Canada during the early 1930s saw an economic downturn, leading to hardship across the country.
Canada occupies much of the continent of North America, sharing land borders with the contiguous United States to the south, and the US state of Alaska to the northwest.
Canada stretches from the Atlantic Ocean in the east to the Pacific Ocean in the west; to the north lies the Arctic Ocean.
By total area (including its waters), Canada is the second-largest country in the world, after Russia.
Since 1925, Canada has claimed the portion of the Arctic between 60° and 141°W longitude, but this claim is not universally recognized.
Much of the Canadian Arctic is covered by ice and permafrost.
Canada has the longest coastline in the world, with a total length of 243,042 kilometres (151,019 mi).
Since the end of the last glacial period, Canada has consisted of eight distinct forest regions, including extensive boreal forest on the Canadian Shield.
Canada has over 2,000,000 lakes (563 greater than 100 km2 (39 sq mi)), more than any other country, containing much of the world's fresh water.
Average winter and summer high temperatures across Canada vary from region to region.
Canada's federal structure divides government responsibilities between the federal government and the ten provinces.
The Bank of Canada is the central bank of the country.
The Bank of Canada is the sole authority authorized to issue currency in the form of Canadian bank notes.
The Constitution of Canada is the supreme law of the country, and consists of written text and unwritten conventions.
Criminal law is solely a federal responsibility and is uniform throughout Canada.
Canada is recognized as a middle power for its role in international affairs with a tendency to pursue multilateral solutions.
Canada's peacekeeping role during the 20th century has played a major role in its global image.
Canada and the United States share the world's longest undefended border, co-operate on military campaigns and exercises, and are each other's largest trading partner.
Canada currently employs a professional, volunteer military force of 92,000 active personnel and approximately 51,000 reserve personnel.
Canada is a federation composed of ten provinces and three territories.
Canada is the world's eleventh-largest economy as of 2015, with a nominal GDP of approximately US$1.79 trillion.
Canada is one of the few developed nations that are net exporters of energy.
Atlantic Canada possesses vast offshore deposits of natural gas, and Alberta also hosts large oil and gas resources.