Sun
Sun
The Sun is the star at the center of the Solar System.
The Sun is a nearly perfect sphere of hot plasma, with internal convective motion that generates a magnetic field via a dynamo process.
The Sun is by far the most important source of energy for life on Earth.
The Sun is a G-type main-sequence star based on its spectral class, and is informally referred to as a yellow dwarf.
The Sun is roughly middle-aged: it has not changed dramatically for more than four billion years, and will remain fairly stable for more than another five billion years.
After hydrogen fusion in its core has stopped, the Sun will undergo severe changes and become a red giant.
The enormous effect of the Sun on Earth has been recognized since prehistoric times, and the Sun has been regarded by some cultures as a deity.
The synodic rotation of Earth and its orbit around the Sun are the basis of the solar calendar, which is the predominant calendar in use today.
Solar deities and Sun worship can be found throughout most of recorded history in various forms.
The Sun is viewed as a goddess in Germanic paganism.
In ancient Roman culture, Sunday was the day of the Sun god.
In paganism, the Sun was a source of life, giving warmth and illumination to mankind.
The Sun is a G-type main-sequence star that comprises about 99.86% of the mass of the Solar System.
The Sun has an absolute magnitude of +4.83, estimated to be brighter than about 85% of the stars in the Milky Way, most of which are red dwarfs.
The formation of the Sun may have been triggered by shockwaves from one or more nearby supernovae.
The Sun is by far the brightest object in the sky, with an apparent magnitude of −26.74.
The Sun does not have a definite boundary, and in its outer parts its density decreases exponentially with increasing distance from its center.
The tidal effect of the planets is weak and does not significantly affect the shape of the Sun.
The Sun rotates faster at its equator than at its poles.
Viewed from Earth as it orbits the Sun, the apparent rotational period of the Sun at its equator is about 28 days.
The solar constant is the amount of power that the Sun deposits per unit area that is directly exposed to sunlight.
When measuring all the photons emitted, the Sun is actually emitting more photons in the green portion of the spectrum than any other.
When the Sun is low in the sky, atmospheric scattering renders the Sun yellow, red, orange, or magenta.
Despite its typical whiteness, most people mentally picture the Sun as yellow; the reasons for this are the subject of debate.
The Sun inherited its chemical composition from the interstellar medium out of which it formed.
In the 1970s, much research focused on the abundances of iron-group elements in the Sun.
The core of the Sun extends from the center to about 20–25% of the solar radius.
The visible surface of the Sun, the photosphere, is the layer below which the Sun becomes opaque to visible light.
Above the photosphere visible sunlight is free to propagate into space, and its energy escapes the Sun entirely.
The chromosphere, transition region, and corona are much hotter than the surface of the Sun.
A flow of plasma outward from the Sun into interplanetary space is the solar wind.
The heliosphere, the tenuous outermost atmosphere of the Sun, is filled with the solar wind plasma.
The Sun has a magnetic field that varies across the surface of the Sun.
The solar magnetic field extends well beyond the Sun itself.
The electrically conducting solar wind plasma carries the Sun's magnetic field into space, forming what is called the interplanetary magnetic field.
The Sun's magnetic field leads to many effects that are collectively called solar activity.
A recent theory claims that there are magnetic instabilities in the core of the Sun that cause fluctuations with periods of either 41,000 or 100,000 years.
The Sun today is roughly halfway through the most stable part of its life.
Each second, more than four million tonnes of matter are converted into energy within the Sun's core, producing neutrinos and solar radiation.
The Sun will spend a total of approximately 10 billion years as a main-sequence star.
It is estimated that the Sun has become 30% brighter in the last 4.5 billion years.
The Sun does not have enough mass to explode as a supernova.
Looking directly at the Sun causes phosphene visual artifacts and temporary partial blindness.
Ultraviolet light from the Sun has antiseptic properties and can be used to sanitize tools and water.