Oxygen
Oxygen
Oxygen is a chemical element with symbol O and atomic number 8.
By mass, oxygen is the third-most abundant element in the universe, after hydrogen and helium.
Oxygen is necessary to sustain most terrestrial life.
Oxygen is continuously replenished by photosynthesis, which uses the energy of sunlight to produce oxygen from water and carbon dioxide.
Oxygen is too chemically reactive to remain a free element in air without being continuously replenished by the photosynthetic action of living organisms.
At low earth orbit altitudes, sufficient atomic oxygen is present to cause corrosion of spacecraft.
Oxygen levels in the atmosphere are trending slightly downward globally, possibly because of fossil-fuel burning.
At standard temperature and pressure, oxygen is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas with the molecular formula O2, referred to as dioxygen.
As dioxygen, two oxygen atoms are chemically bound to each other.
Singlet oxygen is a name given to several higher-energy species of molecular O2 in which all the electron spins are paired.
In nature, singlet oxygen is commonly formed from water during photosynthesis, using the energy of sunlight.
Oxygen dissolves more readily in water than nitrogen, and in freshwater more readily than seawater.
Liquid oxygen may also be condensed from air using liquid nitrogen as a coolant.
Oxygen is a highly reactive substance and must be segregated from combustible materials.
The spectroscopy of molecular oxygen is associated with the atmospheric processes of aurora, airglow and nightglow.
Naturally occurring oxygen is composed of three stable isotopes, 16O, 17O, and 18O, with 16O being the most abundant (99.762% natural abundance).
Oxygen is the most abundant chemical element by mass in the Earth's biosphere, air, sea and land.
Oxygen is the third most abundant chemical element in the universe, after hydrogen and helium. About 0.9% of the Sun's mass is oxygen.
Oxygen gas is the second most common component of the Earth's atmosphere, taking up 20.8% of its volume and 23.1% of its mass (some 1015 tonnes).
The unusually high concentration of oxygen gas on Earth is the result of the oxygen cycle.
The main driving factor of the oxygen cycle is photosynthesis, which is responsible for modern Earth's atmosphere.
Photosynthesis releases oxygen into the atmosphere, while respiration, decay, and combustion remove it from the atmosphere.
In the present equilibrium, production and consumption occur at the same rate of roughly 1/2000th of the entire atmospheric oxygen per year.
Free oxygen occurs in solution in the world's water bodies.
In nature, free oxygen is produced by the light-driven splitting of water during oxygenic photosynthesis.
Until the discovery of anaerobic metazoa, oxygen was thought to be a requirement for all complex life.
An adult human at rest inhales 1.8 to 2.4 grams of oxygen per minute.
More than 6 billion tonnes of oxygen inhaled by humanity per year.
Free oxygen gas was almost nonexistent in Earth's atmosphere 3.5 billion years ago.
Oxygen gas can be produced through electrolysis of water into molecular oxygen and hydrogen.
Oxygen storage methods include high pressure oxygen tanks, cryogenics and chemical compounds.
Oxygen is used medically for patients who require mechanical ventilation, often at concentrations above the 21% found in ambient air.
Smelting of iron ore into steel consumes 55% of commercially produced oxygen.
25% of commercially produced oxygen is used by the chemical industry.
Water is an oxide of hydrogen and the most familiar oxygen compound.
Due to its electronegativity, oxygen forms chemical bonds with almost all other elements to give corresponding oxides.
Oxygen is present in the atmosphere in trace quantities in the form of carbon dioxide.
Oxygen gas can be toxic at elevated partial pressures, leading to convulsions and other health problems.
Oxygen toxicity to the lungs and central nervous system can occur in deep scuba diving and surface supplied diving.
Highly concentrated sources of oxygen promote rapid combustion.