Sea
Sea
A sea is a large body of salt water that is surrounded in whole or in part by land.
More broadly, "the sea" is the interconnected system of Earth's salty, oceanic waters—considered as one global ocean or as several principal oceanic divisions.
The sea moderates Earth's climate and has important roles in the water cycle, carbon cycle, and nitrogen cycle.
Deep-sea currents are produced by differences in salinity and temperature.
The sea is an essential aspect of human trade, travel, mineral extraction, and power generation.
The shared nature of the sea has made overfishing an increasing problem.
The more recent study of the sea in particular is oceanography.
The subfield dealing with the sea's motion, its forces, and the forces acting upon it is known as physical oceanography.
Sea temperature chiefly depends on the amount of solar radiation it absorbs.
In freezing seas, ice crystals begin to form on the surface.
The amount of light that penetrates the sea depends on the angle of the sun, the local weather, and the sea's turbidity.
Of the light that reaches the surface of the sea, much of it is reflected at the surface and its red wavelengths are absorbed in the top few meters.
The water's oxygen saturation is lower during the night and much lower in the deep sea.
Wind blowing over the surface of the sea causes friction at the interface between air and sea.
At high latitudes, the water is chilled by the low atmospheric temperature and becomes saltier as sea ice crystallizes out.
The zone where land meets sea is known as the coast and the part between the lowest spring tides and the upper limit reached by splashing waves is the shore.
At the last glacial maximum some 20,000 years ago, the sea level was 120 meters (390 ft) below its present-day level.
For at least the last 100 years, the sea level has been rising at an average rate of about 1.8 mm (0.071 in) per year.
The sea plays a part in the water cycle, in which water evaporates from the ocean, travels through the atmosphere as vapor, condenses, falls again, and then largely returns to the sea.
Life may have originated in the sea and all the major groups of animals are represented there.
Light is only able to penetrate the top 200 m (660 ft) so this is the only part of the sea where plants can grow.
The seabed provides a range of habitats on or under the surface of the substrate which are used by creatures adapted to these conditions.
Humans have travelled the sea since prehistoric times, originally on rafts and in dugout, reed, and bark canoes.
Nowadays, large quantities of goods are transported by sea, especially across the Atlantic and around the Pacific Rim.
Shipping lanes are the routes on the open sea used by cargo vessels, traditionally making use of trade winds and currents.
As of 2006, there were an estimated 43.5 million people involved in capturing or raising seafood, 85.5% of whom lived in Asia.
Over 3 million vessels are employed in sea fishing.
As well as the wild stock, about 79 million metric tons (87 million tons) of food and non-food products were produced by sea farming in 2010, an all-time high.
Sea cucumbers can be ranched on the seabed.
The Law of the Sea is the particular body international law applied to maritime questions and offenses.
The sea still remains a venue for recreational boating and large cruise ships.
Use of the sea for leisure developed in the nineteenth century and became a significant industry in the twentieth century.
Many humans enjoy venturing into the sea: children paddle and splash in the shallows, while others swim or relax on the beach.
Tidal power uses generators to produce electricity from tidal flows, sometimes by using a dam to store and then release seawater.
Drilling for oil in the sea has environmental impacts. Animals may be disorientated by seismic waves used to locate deposits, probably causing the beaching of whales.
The sea holds enormous quantities of valuable dissolved minerals.
Many substances enter the sea as a result of human activities.
The dumping of waste (including oil, noxious liquids, sewage, and garbage) at sea is governed by international law.
Foraging sea birds such as the albatross and petrel may mistake debris for food and accumulate indigestible plastic in their digestive systems.
Most oil pollution in the sea comes from cities and industry. Oil is dangerous for marine animals.
As a symbol, the sea has for centuries played a role in literature and poetry.