Moon
Moon
The Moon is Earth's only permanent natural satellite.
The average distance of the Moon from the Earth is 238,855 miles (384,400 km),  or 1.28 light-seconds.
The Moon is thought to have formed about 4.5 billion years ago, not long after Earth.
The Moon is in synchronous rotation with Earth, always showing the same face.
The Moon's gravitational influence produces the ocean tides, body tides, and the slight lengthening of the day.
The Moon's current orbital distance is about thirty times the diameter of Earth, with its apparent size in the sky almost the same as that of the Sun.
The Moon's linear distance from Earth is currently increasing at a rate of 3.82 ± 0.07 centimetres (1.504 ± 0.028 in) per year.
The Soviet Union's Luna programme was the first to reach the Moon with unmanned spacecraft in 1959.
Since the Apollo 17 mission in 1972, the Moon has been visited only by unmanned spacecraft.
The principal modern English adjective pertaining to the Moon is lunar, derived from the Latin Luna.
More recent simulations suggest a larger fraction of the Moon derived from the original Earth mass.
The Moon is a differentiated body: it has a geochemically distinct crust, mantle, and core.
The Moon has a solid iron-rich inner core and a fluid outer core primarily made of liquid iron.
The Moon is the second-densest satellite in the Solar System, after Io.
The topography of the Moon has been measured with laser altimetry and stereo image analysis.
The major geologic process that has affected the Moon's surface is impact cratering.
There are estimated to be roughly 300,000 craters wider than 1 km (0.6 mi) on the Moon's near side alone.
Liquid water cannot persist on the lunar surface.
Signatures of water have been found to exist on the lunar surface.
The gravitational field of the Moon has been measured through tracking the Doppler shift of radio signals emitted by orbiting spacecraft.
The Moon has an external magnetic field of about 1–100 nanoteslas, less than one-hundredth that of Earth.
The Moon has an atmosphere so tenuous as to be nearly vacuum, with a total mass of less than 10 metric tons (9.8 long tons; 11 short tons).
A permanent asymmetric moon dust cloud exists around the Moon, created by small particles from comets.
Estimates are 5 tons of comet particles strike the Moon's surface each 24 hours.
The particles strike the Moon's surface ejecting moon dust above the Moon.
The Moon's axial tilt with respect to the ecliptic is only 1.5424°, much less than the 23.44° of Earth.
The Moon's solar illumination varies much less with season, and topographical details play a crucial role in seasonal effects.
The Moon makes a complete orbit around Earth with respect to the fixed stars about once every 27.3 days (its sidereal period).
Unlike most satellites of other planets, the Moon orbits closer to the ecliptic plane than to the planet's equatorial plane.
The Moon's orbit is subtly perturbed by the Sun and Earth in many small, complex and interacting ways.
The plane of the Moon's orbital motion gradually rotates, which affects other aspects of lunar motion.
The Moon is exceptionally large relative to Earth: a quarter its diameter and 1/81 its mass.
It is the largest moon in the Solar System relative to the size of its planet.
Earth and the Moon are nevertheless still considered a planet–satellite system, rather than a double planet.
The Moon is in synchronous rotation: it rotates about its axis in about the same time it takes to orbit Earth.
The side of the Moon that faces Earth is called the near side, and the opposite side the far side.
The Moon has an exceptionally low albedo, giving it a reflectance that is slightly brighter than that of worn asphalt.
The highest altitude of the Moon in the sky varies with the lunar phase and the season of the year.
The full moon is highest during winter.
The Moon is visible for two weeks every 27.3 days at the North and South Pole.
The Moon's light is used by zooplankton in the Arctic when the sun is below the horizon for months on end.
The tides on Earth are mostly generated by the gradient in intensity of the Moon's gravitational pull from one side of Earth to the other, the tidal forces.
The tidal effect of the Sun on Earth's oceans is almost half that of the Moon, and their gravitational interplay is responsible for spring and neap tides.
Eclipses can only occur when the Sun, Earth, and Moon are all in a straight line.
Solar eclipses occur at new moon, when the Moon is between the Sun and Earth.
Lunar eclipses occur at full moon, when Earth is between the Sun and Moon.
The apparent size of the Moon is roughly the same as that of the Sun, with both being viewed at close to one-half a degree wide.
The Cold War-inspired Space Race between the Soviet Union and the U.S. led to an acceleration of interest in exploration of the Moon.
The Moon was often personified as a lunar deity in mythology and religion.
The Moon goddess Selene was represented as wearing a crescent on her headgear in an arrangement reminiscent of horns.
The Moon's regular phases make it a very convenient timepiece, and the periods of its waxing and waning form the basis of many of the oldest calendars.
The Moon has been the subject of many works of art and literature and the inspiration for countless others.
The Moon has long been associated with insanity and irrationality.
The words lunacy and lunatic (popular shortening loony) are derived from the Latin name for the Moon, Luna.