Japan
Japan
During the Meiji period from 1868, Japan expanded economically with the embrace of the market economy.
As of 2012, Japan is the third largest national economy in the world, after the United States and China, in terms of nominal GDP.
As of 2014, Japan's public debt was estimated at more than 200 percent of its annual gross domestic product, the largest of any nation in the world.
Today Japan ranks highly for competitiveness and economic freedom.
Japan has a large industrial capacity, and is home to some of the largest and most technologically advanced producers/
Agricultural businesses in Japan cultivate 13 percent of Japan's land, and Japan accounts for nearly 15 percent of the global fish catch, second only to China.
As of 2010, Japan's labor force consisted of some 65.9 million workers.
Japan has a low unemployment rate of around four percent.
Housing in Japan is characterized by limited land supply in urban areas.
Japan's main imports are machinery and equipment, fossil fuels, foodstuffs (in particular beef), chemicals, textiles and raw materials for its industries.
Japan ranks 27th of 189 countries in the 2014 Ease of doing business index and has one of the smallest tax revenues of the developed world.
As of 2006, Japan was home to 326 companies from the Forbes Global 2000 or 16.3 percent.
In 2013, it was announced that Japan would be importing shale natural gas.
Japan is a leading nation in scientific research, particularly technology, machinery and biomedical research.
Japan is a world leader in fundamental scientific research, having produced twenty-two Nobel laureates in either physics, chemistry or medicine, and three Fields medalists.
Japan leads the world in robotics production and use, possessing more than 20% (300,000 of 1.3 million) of the world's industrial robots as of 2013.
It's estimated that 16% of the world's gold and 22% of the world's silver is contained in electronic technology in Japan.
Japan's road spending has been extensive. Its 1.2 million kilometers of paved road are the main means of transportation.
There are 175 airports in Japan.
Japanese society is linguistically and culturally homogeneous, composed of 98.5% ethnic Japanese, with small populations of foreign workers.
Most Japanese continue to see Japan as a monocultural society.
Japan has the second longest overall life expectancy at birth of any country in the world: 83.5 years for persons born in the period 2010–2015.
The Japanese population is rapidly aging as a result of a post–World War II baby boom followed by a decrease in birth rates.
A growing number of younger Japanese are not marrying or remain childless.
Japan has full religious freedom based on Article 20 of its Constitution.
More than 99 percent of the population speaks Japanese as their first language.
In Japan, health care is provided by national and local governments.
Japanese culture has evolved greatly from its origins. Contemporary culture combines influences from Asia, Europe and North America.
Japan has a developed system for the protection and promotion of both tangible and intangible Cultural Properties and National Treasures.
Japanese comics now known as manga developed in the 20th century and have become popular worldwide.
Japanese animation is called anime.
Japanese-made video game consoles have been popular since the 1980s.
Japanese music is eclectic and diverse. Many instruments, such as the koto, were introduced in the 9th and 10th centuries.
Western classical music, introduced in the late 19th century, now forms an integral part of Japanese culture.
Japanese cuisine is known for its emphasis on seasonality of food, quality of ingredients and presentation.
Japanese cuisine offers a vast array of regional specialties that use traditional recipes and local ingredients.
The Michelin Guide has awarded restaurants in Japan more Michelin stars than the rest of the world combined.
Traditionally, sumo is considered Japan's national sport.
Japanese martial arts such as judo, karate and kendo are widely practiced and enjoyed by spectators in the country.
After the Meiji Restoration, many Western sports were introduced in Japan and began to spread through the education system.
Baseball is currently the most popular spectator sport in Japan.
Japan has one of the most successful football teams in Asia, winning the Asian Cup four times.