Tornado
Tornado
Tornadoes produce a detectable seismic signature, and research continues on isolating it and understanding the process.
Tornadoes emit on the electromagnetic spectrum, with sferics and E-field effects detected.
There are observed correlations between tornadoes and patterns of lightning.
Tornadic storms do not contain more lightning than other storms and some tornadic cells never produce lightning.
Temperature tends to decrease and moisture content to increase in the immediate vicinity of a tornado.
Tornadoes often develop from a class of thunderstorms known as supercells.
In addition to tornadoes, very heavy rain, frequent lightning, strong wind gusts, and hail are common in such storms.
Initially, the tornado has a good source of warm, moist air flowing inward to power it, and it grows until it reaches the "mature stage".
A multiple-vortex tornado is a type of tornado in which two or more columns of spinning air rotate about their own axis and at the same time around a common center.
A multi-vortex structure can occur in almost any circulation, but is very often observed in intense tornadoes.
The satellite tornado may appear to "orbit" the larger tornado (hence the name), giving the appearance of one, large multi-vortex tornado.
A waterspout is defined by the National Weather Service as a tornado over water.
A gustnado, or gust front tornado, is a small, vertical swirl associated with a gust front or downburst.
A dust devil (also known as a whirlwind) resembles a tornado in that it is a vertical swirling column of air.
Small-scale, tornado-like circulations can occur near any intense surface heat source. Those that occur near intense wildfires are called fire whirls.
Tornadoes vary in intensity regardless of shape, size, and location, though strong tornadoes are typically larger than weak tornadoes.
In the case of violent tornadoes, only a small portion of the path is of violent intensity, most of the higher intensity from subvortices.
A few significant tornadoes occur annually in Europe, Asia, southern Africa, and southeastern South America, respectively.
The United States has the most tornadoes of any country, nearly four times more than estimated in all of Europe, excluding waterspouts.
The United States averages about 1,200 tornadoes per year.
Tornadoes are most common in spring and least common in winter, but tornadoes can occur any time of year that favorable conditions occur.
Tornadoes are focused in the right front quadrant of landfalling tropical cyclones, which tend to occur in the late summer and autumn.
Tornado occurrence is highly dependent on the time of day, because of solar heating.
Worldwide, most tornadoes occur in the late afternoon, between 3 pm and 7 pm local time, with a peak near 5 pm.
Destructive tornadoes can occur at any time of day.
Increased moisture can fuel an increase in severe weather and tornado activity, particularly in the cool season.
Rigorous attempts to warn of tornadoes began in the United States in the mid-20th century.
Before the 1950s, the only method of detecting a tornado was by someone seeing it on the ground.
The first public tornado warnings were issued in 1950 and the first tornado watches and convective outlooks in 1952.
Today, most developed countries have a network of weather radars, which remains the main method of detecting signatures probably associated with tornadoes.
Storms that produce tornadoes can feature intense updrafts, sometimes exceeding 150 mph (240 km/h).
Debris from a tornado can be lofted into the parent storm and carried a very long distance.
Waterspouts and tornadoes have been advanced as an explanation for instances of raining fish and other animals.
Though tornadoes can strike in an instant, there are precautions and preventative measures that people can take to increase the chances of surviving a tornado.
Folklore often identifies a green sky with tornadoes, and though the phenomenon may be associated with severe weather, there is no evidence linking it specifically with tornadoes.
Opening windows may actually increase the severity of the tornado's damage.
A violent tornado can destroy a house whether its windows are open or closed.
Tornadoes have been known to cross major rivers, climb mountains, affect valleys, and have damaged several city centers.
As a general rule, no area is safe from tornadoes, though some areas are more susceptible than others.
Meteorology is a relatively young science and the study of tornadoes is newer still.
Although researched for about 140 years and intensively for around 60 years, there are still aspects of tornadoes which remain a mystery.
Reliably predicting tornado intensity and longevity remains a problem, as do details affecting characteristics of a tornado during its life cycle.
Scientists still do not know the exact mechanisms by which most tornadoes form, and occasional tornadoes still strike without a tornado warning being issued.
Solar storms similar to tornadoes have been recorded, but it is unknown how closely related they are to their terrestrial counterparts.