Batman
Batman
Batman is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books.
Batman's secret identity is Bruce Wayne, an American billionaire, playboy, philanthropist, and owner of Wayne Enterprises.
After witnessing the murder of his parents as a child, batman swore vengeance against criminals, an oath tempered by a sense of justice.
Batman trains himself physically and intellectually and crafts a bat-inspired persona to fight crime.
Batman operates in the fictional Gotham City, with assistance from various supporting characters.
Unlike most superheroes, Batman does not possess any superpowers; rather, he relies on his own skills.
A large assortment of villains make up Batman's rogues gallery, including his archenemy, the Joker.
Batman became popular soon after his introduction in 1939 and gained his own comic book title, Batman, the following year.
The late 1960s Batman television series used a camp aesthetic, which continued to be associated with the character for years after the show ended.
Batman has also intrigued psychiatrists, with many trying to understand the character's psyche.
Over the course of the first few Batman strips elements were added to the character and the artistic depiction of Batman evolved.
Robin was introduced, because Batman needed a "Watson" with whom Batman could talk.
By 1942, the writers and artists behind the Batman comics had established most of the basic elements of the Batman mythos.
Batman was one of the few superhero characters to be continuously published as interest in the genre waned during the 1950s.
In the late 1950s, Batman stories gradually became more science fiction-oriented.
The debut of the Batman television series in 1966 had a profound influence on the character.
Wayne supports philanthropic causes through his nonprofit Wayne Foundation, but is more widely known as a celebrity socialite.
Although Bruce Wayne leads an active romantic life, crime-fighting accounts for most of his time.
Writers of Batman and Superman stories have often compared and contrasted the two.
Batman's primary character traits can be summarized as "wealth; physical prowess; deductive abilities and obsession".
The details and tone of Batman comic books have varied over the years due to different creative teams.
The driving force behind Bruce Wayne's character is his parents' murder and their absence.
Batman is often treated as a vigilante by other characters in his stories.
Over the years, there have been numerous others to assume the name of Batman, or to officially take over for Bruce during his leaves of absence.
Batman has no inherent superhuman powers; he relies on "his own scientific knowledge, detective skills, and athletic prowess".
In the stories, Batman is regarded as one of the world's greatest detectives, if not the world's greatest crime solver.
Batman has been repeatedly described as having a genius-level intellect, being one of the greatest martial artists, and having peak human physical conditioning.
Batman has the ability to function under great physical pain and to withstand telepathy and mind control.
Batman's body armored costume incorporates the imagery of a bat in order to frighten criminals.
Batman's batsuit aids in his combat against enemies. It protects him from gunfire and other significant impacts.
Batman's primary vehicle is the Batmobile, which is usually depicted as an imposing black car, often with tailfins that suggest a bat's wings.
Batman has an aircraft called the Batplane (later called the "Batwing"), along with various other means of transportation.
Batman keeps most of his field equipment in his utility belt.
The Batcave is Batman's secret headquarters, consisting of a series of subterranean caves beneath his mansion, Wayne Manor.
Batman uses a large arsenal of specialized, high-tech vehicles and gadgets in his war against crime, the designs of which usually share a bat motif.
In early strips, Batman's career as a vigilante earns him the ire of the police.