Star
Star
A star is a luminous sphere of plasma held together by its own gravity.
The nearest star to Earth is the Sun.
Astronomers have assembled star catalogues that identify the known stars and provide standardized stellar designations.
Most of the stars in the Universe, including all stars outside our galaxy, the Milky Way, are invisible to the naked eye from Earth.
The total mass of a star is the main factor that determines its evolution and eventual fate.
The star's internal pressure prevents it from collapsing further under its own gravity.
A star with mass greater than 0.4 times the Sun's will expand to become a red giant when the hydrogen fuel in its core is exhausted.
As the star expands it throws a part of its mass, enriched with those heavier elements, into the interstellar environment, to be recycled later as new stars.
Binary and multi-star systems consist of two or more stars that are gravitationally bound and generally move around each other in stable orbits.
Stars can form part of a much larger gravitationally bound structure, such as a star cluster or a galaxy.
Historically, stars have been important to civilizations throughout the world.
Stars have been part of religious practices and used for celestial navigation and orientation.
Many ancient astronomers believed that stars were permanently affixed to a heavenly sphere and that they were immutable.
Many of the constellations and star names in use today derive from Greek astronomy.
Parallax measurements demonstrated the vast separation of the stars in the heavens.
Observation of double stars gained increasing importance during the 19th century.
Important theoretical work on the physical structure of stars occurred during the first decades of the twentieth century.
Successful models were developed to explain the interiors of stars and stellar evolution.
Stars condense from regions of space of higher density, yet those regions are less dense than within a vacuum chamber.
Most stars form in groups of dozens to hundreds of thousands of stars.
All stars spend the majority of their existence as main sequence stars, fueled primarily by the nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium within their cores.
Stars of different masses have markedly different properties at various stages of their development.
The ultimate fate of more massive stars differs from that of less massive stars, as do their luminosities and the impact they have on their environment.
Most stars are observed to be members of binary star systems, and the properties of those binaries are the result of the conditions in which they formed.
A gas cloud must lose its angular momentum in order to collapse and form a star.
Stars spend about 90% of their existence fusing hydrogen into helium in high-temperature and high-pressure reactions near the core.
Every star generates a stellar wind of particles that causes a continual outflow of gas into space.
The time a star spends on the main sequence depends primarily on the amount of fuel it has and the rate at which it fuses it.
Massive stars consume their fuel very rapidly and are short-lived. Low mass stars consume their fuel very slowly.
During their helium-burning phase, stars of more than nine solar masses expand to form red supergiants.
The blown-off outer layers of dying stars include heavy elements, which may be recycled during the formation of new stars.
Most stars are between 1 billion and 10 billion years old.
The more massive the star, the shorter its lifespan, primarily because massive stars have greater pressure on their cores, causing them to burn hydrogen more rapidly.
The most massive stars last an average of a few million years, while stars of minimum mass (red dwarfs) can last tens to hundreds of billions of years.
The magnetic field of a star is generated within regions of the interior where convective circulation occurs.
Young, rapidly rotating stars tend to have high levels of surface activity because of their magnetic field.
The magnetic field can act upon a star's stellar wind, functioning as a brake to gradually slow the rate of rotation with time.
The combination of the radius and the mass of a star determines its surface gravity.
Young stars can have a rotation greater than 100 km/s at the equator.
The luminosity of a star is the amount of light and other forms of radiant energy it radiates per unit of time. It has units of power.
The luminosity of a star is determined by its radius and surface temperature.
Many stars do not radiate uniformly across their entire surface.
Patches of the star's surface with a lower temperature and luminosity than average are known as starspots.
Variable stars have periodic or random changes in luminosity because of intrinsic or extrinsic properties.
The interior of a stable star is in a state of hydrostatic equilibrium: the forces on any small volume almost exactly counterbalance each other.
Stars with several times the mass of the Sun have a convection zone deep within the interior and a radiative zone in the outer layers.
The photosphere is that portion of a star that is visible to an observer.
From the corona, a stellar wind of plasma particles expands outward from the star, until it interacts with the interstellar medium.
A variety of nuclear fusion reactions take place in the cores of stars, that depend upon their mass and composition.