Atheism
Atheism
Atheism is, in the broadest sense, the absence of belief in the existence of deities.
Atheism is contrasted with theism, which, in its most general form, is the belief that at least one deity exists.
Arguments for atheism range from the philosophical to social and historical approaches.
Since conceptions of atheism vary, accurate estimations of current numbers of atheists are difficult.
Atheism has been regarded as compatible with agnosticism, and has also been contrasted with it.
The ancient Romans accused Christians of being atheists for not worshiping the pagan deities.
Definitions of atheism vary in the degree of consideration a person must put to the idea of gods to be considered an atheist.
Atheism has sometimes been defined to include the simple absence of belief that any deities exist.
Positive atheism is the explicit affirmation that gods do not exist.
Negative atheism includes all other forms of non-theism.
Some atheists have doubted the very need for the term "atheism".
The broadest demarcation of atheistic rationale is between practical and theoretical atheism.
In practical or pragmatic atheism, individuals live as if there are no gods and explain natural phenomena without reference to any deities.
Logical atheism holds that the various conceptions of gods are ascribed logically inconsistent qualities.
Atheism is acceptable within some religious and spiritual belief systems.
Early Buddhism was atheistic as Buddha's path involved no mention of gods.
Later conceptions of Buddhism consider Buddha himself a god.
Atheist as a label of practical godlessness was used at least as early as 1577.
In the 20th century, globalization contributed to the expansion of the atheism to refer to disbelief in all deities.
Atheistic schools are found in early Indian thought.
The meaning of "atheist" changed over the course of classical antiquity.
Atheism in the 20th century, particularly in the form of practical atheism, advanced in many societies.
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall, the number of actively anti-religious regimes has reduced considerably.
A 2010 survey found that those identifying themselves as atheists or agnostics are on average more knowledgeable about religion than followers of major faiths.
It is difficult to quantify the number of atheists in the world.
A broad figure estimates the number of atheists and agnostics on Earth at 1.1 billion.
In the US, there was a 1% to 5% increase in self-reported atheism from 2005 to 2012.
In recent years, the profile of atheism has risen substantially in the Arab world.
A study noted positive correlations between levels of education and secularism, including atheism, in America.
In a 2008 study, researchers found intelligence to be negatively related to religious belief in Europe and the United States.
In a sample of 137 countries, the correlation between national IQ and disbelief in God was found to be 0.60.