Canada
Canada
Many towns in northern Canada, where agriculture is difficult, are sustainable because of nearby mines or sources of timber.
The Canadian Space Agency operates a highly active space program, conducting deep-space, planetary, and aviation research, and developing rockets and satellites.
The 2011 Canadian census counted a total population of 33,476,688, an increase of around 5.9 percent over the 2006 figure.
By December 2012, Statistics Canada reported a population of over 35 million, signifying the fastest growth rate of any G8 nation.
Canada has one of the highest per-capita immigration rates in the world, driven mainly by economic policy and, to a lesser extent family reunification.
The Canadian public as-well as the major political parties support the current level of immigration.
In 2010, a record 280,636 people immigrated to Canada.
The Canadian government anticipated between 280,000 and 305,000 new permanent residents in 2016, a similar number of immigrants as in recent years.
As of 2013, the average life expectancy for Canadians is 81 years.
The majority of Canadians (69.9%) live in family households, 26.8% report living alone, and those living with unrelated persons reported at 3.7%.
Canada is the most educated country in the world; the country ranks first worldwide in the number of adults having tertiary education.
Canada spends about 5.3% of its GDP on education. The country invests heavily in tertiary education (more than 20 000 USD per student).
Canada is religiously diverse, encompassing a wide range of beliefs and customs.
Canada has no official church, and the government is officially committed to religious pluralism.
Freedom of religion in Canada is a constitutionally protected right, allowing individuals to assemble and worship without limitation or interference.
With Christianity in decline after having once been central and integral to Canadian culture and daily life, Canada has become a post-Christian, secular state.
The majority of Canadians consider religion to be unimportant in their daily lives, but still believe in God.
According to the 2011 census, 67.3% of Canadians identify as Christian; of these, Roman Catholics make up the largest group, accounting for 38.7% of the population.
A multitude of languages are used by Canadians, with English and French being the mother tongues of approximately 60% and 20% of Canadians respectively.
Nearly 6.8 million Canadians listed a non-official language as their mother tongue.
Canada is home to many sign languages, two of which are Indigenous.
Canada's culture draws influences from its broad range of constituent nationalities, and policies that promote a "just society" are constitutionally protected.
Canada has placed emphasis on equality and inclusiveness for all its people.
Multiculturalism is often cited as one of Canada's significant accomplishments, and a key distinguishing element of Canadian identity.
Historically, Canada has been influenced by British, French, and Aboriginal cultures and traditions.
Through their language, art and music, Aboriginal peoples continue to influence the Canadian identity.
During the 20th century Canadians with African, Caribbean and Asian nationalities have added to the Canadian identity and its culture.
Canadian humour is an integral part of the Canadian Identity and is reflected in its folklore, literature, music, art and media.
The primary characteristics of Canadian humour are irony, parody, and satire.
Many Canadian comedians have archived international success in the American TV and film industries and are amongst the most recognized in the world.
Canada's national symbols are influenced by natural, historical, and Aboriginal sources.
The use of the maple leaf as a Canadian symbol dates to the early 18th century.
The maple leaf is depicted on Canada's current and previous flags, and on the Arms of Canada.
Canadian literature is often divided into French- and English-language literatures, which are rooted in the literary traditions of France and Britain, respectively.
By the 1990s, Canadian literature was viewed as some of the world's best.
Canada's ethnic and cultural diversity are reflected in its literature, with many of its most prominent modern writers focusing on ethnic life.
The Canadian music industry is the sixth largest in the world producing internationally renowned composers, musicians and ensembles.
Canada's official national sports are ice hockey and lacrosse.