Koala
Koala
Koalas make use of a novel vocal organ to produce low-pitched sounds.
The koala has several adaptations for its eucalypt diet, which is of low nutritive value, of high toxicity, and high in dietary fibre.
Koalas may store food in their cheek pouches before it is ready to be chewed.
Koalas can select which food particles to retain for longer fermentation and which to pass through.
The koala's geographic range covers roughly 1,000,000 km2 (390,000 sq mi), and 30 ecoregions.
Koalas can be found in habitats ranging from relatively open forests to woodlands, and in climates ranging from tropical to cool temperate.
Koalas are herbivorous, and while most of their diet consists of eucalypt leaves, they can be found in trees of other genera.
Although the foliage of over 600 species of Eucalyptus is available, the koala shows a strong preference for around 30.
Since eucalypt leaves have a high water content, the koala does not need to drink often; its daily water turnover rate ranges from 71 to 91 ml/kg of body weight.
Although females can meet their water requirements from eating leaves, larger males require additional water found on the ground or in tree hollows.
When feeding, a koala holds onto a branch with hindpaws and one forepaw while the other forepaw grasps foliage.
Small koalas can move close to the end of a branch, but larger ones stay near the thicker bases.
Koalas consume up to 400 grams (14 oz) of leaves a day, spread over four to six feeding sessions.
Koalas typically eat and sleep in the same tree, possibly for as long as a day.
On very hot days, a koala may climb down to the coolest part of the tree which is cooler than the surrounding air.
The koala hugs the tree to lose heat without panting.
On warm days, a koala may rest with its back against a branch or lie on its stomach or back with its limbs dangling.
On windy days, a koala finds a lower, thicker branch on which to rest.
While it spends most of the time in the tree, the koala descends to the ground to move to another tree, walking on all fours.
The koala usually grooms itself with its hindpaws, but sometimes uses its forepaws or mouth.
Koalas are asocial animals and spend just 15 minutes a day on social behaviours.
When a male enters a new tree, he marks it by rubbing his chest gland against the trunk or a branch.
Adult males communicate with loud bellows—low pitched sounds that consist of snore-like inhalations and resonant exhalations that sound like growls.
Young koalas squeak when in distress.
When another individual climbs over it, a koala makes a low grunt with its mouth closed.
Koalas make numerous facial expressions.
As the young koala approaches six months, the mother begins to prepare it for its eucalyptus diet.
Koalas may live from 13 to 18 years in the wild.
Koalas usually survive falls from trees and immediately climb back up.
The koala is well known worldwide and is a major draw for Australian zoos and wildlife parks.
The koala has been featured in advertisements, games, cartoons, and as soft toys.
Factors that contribute to the koala's enduring popularity include its childlike body proportions and teddy bear-like face.
Early European settlers in Australia considered the koala to be a prowling sloth-like animal with a "fierce and menacing look".
Koalas were hunted for food by Aboriginals.
The koala was heavily hunted by European settlers in the early 20th century, largely for its thick, soft fur.
While urbanisation can pose a threat to koala populations, the animals can survive in urban areas provided enough trees are present.