Cabbage
Cabbage
Cabbage is a leafy green or purple plant, grown as an annual vegetable crop for its dense-leaved heads.
Cabbage heads generally range from 0.5 to 4 kilograms (1 to 9 lb), and can be green, purple and white.
Smooth-leafed firm-headed green cabbages are the most common, with smooth-leafed red and crinkle-leafed savoy cabbages of both colors seen more rarely.
Cabbage is a multi-layered vegetable.
Under conditions of long sunlit days such as are found at high northern latitudes in summer, cabbages can grow much larger.
It is difficult to trace the exact history of cabbage, but it was most likely domesticated somewhere in Europe before 1000 BC.
Cabbage heads are generally picked during the first year of the plant's life cycle, but plants intended for seed are allowed to grow a second year.
Cabbage is prone to several nutrient deficiencies, as well as to multiple pests, and bacterial and fungal diseases.
Cabbages are prepared in many different ways for eating.
Cabbages can be pickled, fermented for dishes, steamed, stewed, braised, or eaten raw.
Cabbage is a good source of vitamin K, vitamin C and dietary fiber.
Contaminated cabbage has been linked to cases of food-borne illness in humans.
Through the centuries, "cabbage" and its derivatives have been used as slang for numerous items, occupations and activities.
Cash and tobacco have both been described by the slang "cabbage", while "cabbage-head" means a fool or stupid person.
"Cabbaged" means to be exhausted or, vulgarly, in a vegetative state.
Cabbages are 40–60 cm (16–24 in) tall in their first year at the mature vegetative stage.
Most cabbages have thick, alternating leaves, with margins that range from wavy or lobed to highly dissected.
Many shapes, colors and leaf textures are found in various cultivated varieties of cabbage.
Cabbage has been selectively bred for head weight, frost hardiness, fast growth and storage ability.
Cabbage became a favorite vegetable of Australians by the 1830s and was frequently seen at the Sydney Markets.
There are several Guinness Book of World Records entries related to cabbage.
Cabbage is generally grown for its densely leaved heads, produced during the first year of its biennial cycle.
Cabbage perform best when grown in well-drained soil in a location that receives full sun.
In certain climates, cabbage can be planted at the beginning of the cold period and survive until a later warm period without being induced to flower.
Some varieties of cabbage have been developed for ornamental use; these are generally called "flowering cabbage".
Early varieties of cabbage take about 70 days from planting to reach maturity, while late varieties take about 120 days.
Cabbages are mature when they are firm and solid to the touch.
Delays in cabbage harvest can result in the head splitting as a result of expansion of the inner leaves and continued stem growth.
Cabbages sold for market are generally smaller, and different varieties are used for those sold immediately upon harvest and those stored before sale.
Both hand and mechanical harvesting are used, with hand-harvesting generally used for cabbages destined for market sales.
In commercial-scale operations, hand-harvested cabbages are trimmed, sorted, and packed directly in the field to increase efficiency.
Cabbage can be stored the longest at −1 to 2 °C (30 to 36 °F) with a humidity of 90–100 percent; these conditions will result in up to six months of longevity.
Cabbage consumption varies widely around the world. Russia has the highest annual per capita consumption at 20 kilograms (44 lb).
Cabbage is prepared and consumed in many ways.
Cooked cabbage is often criticized for its pungent, unpleasant odor and taste.
In addition to its usual purpose as an edible vegetable, cabbage has been used historically as a medicinal herb for a variety of purported health benefits.
The Ancient Egyptians ate cooked cabbage at the beginning of meals to reduce the intoxicating effects of wine.
The cooling properties of the leaves were used in Britain as a treatment for trench foot in World War I.
Accumulated scientific evidence corroborates that cabbage leaf treatment can reduce the pain and hardness of engorged breasts.
Cabbage has been linked to outbreaks of some food-borne illnesses.