Lion
Lion
With some males exceeding 250 kg (550 lb) in weight, the lion is the second-largest living cat after the tiger.
Wild lions currently exist in sub-Saharan Africa and in India.
Lion populations are untenable outside designated reserves and national parks.
In the wild, males seldom live longer than 10 to 14 years, as injuries sustained from continual fighting with rival males greatly reduce their longevity.
In captivity lions can live more than 20 years.
Lions typically inhabit savanna and grassland, although they may take to bush and forest.
Lions are unusually social compared to other cats.
A pride of lions consists of related females and offspring and a small number of adult males.
Groups of female lions typically hunt together, preying mostly on large ungulates.
Lions are apex and keystone predators, although they are also expert scavengers obtaining over 50 percent of their food by scavenging as opportunity allows.
Sleeping mainly during the day, lions are active primarily at night (nocturnal), although sometimes at twilight (crepuscular).
Highly distinctive, the male lion is easily recognised by its mane, and its face is one of the most widely recognised animal symbols in human culture.
The lion's closest relatives are the other species of the genus Panthera: the tiger, the snow leopard, the jaguar, and the leopard.
Lions have been known to breed with tigers (most often the Siberian and Bengal subspecies) to create hybrids called ligers and tiglons (or tigons).
The liger is a cross between a male lion and a tigress.
Ligers are much bigger than normal lions, typically 3.65 m (12.0 ft) in length, and can weigh up to 500 kg (1,100 lb).
The less common tiglon or tigon is a cross between a lioness and a male tiger.
In contrast to ligers, tigons are often relatively small in comparison to their parents, because of reciprocal gene effects.
Of the living felids the lion is second only to the tiger in length and weight.
Lion colouration varies from light buff to yellowish, reddish, or dark ochraceous brown.
Lion cubs are born with brown rosettes (spots) on their body, rather like those of a leopard.
Lions are the only members of the cat family to display obvious sexual dimorphism – that is, males and females look distinctly different.
The colour of the male's mane varies from blond to black, generally becoming darker as the lion grows older.
The lion is the only felid to have a tufted tail – the function of the tuft and spine are unknown.
Weights for adult lions range between 150 to 250 kg (330 to 550 lb) for males and 120 to 185 kg (265 to 408 lb) for females.
The mane of the adult male lion, unique among cats, is one of the most distinctive characteristics of the species.
In rare cases a female lion can have a mane.
Sexual selection of mates by lionesses favours males with the densest, darkest mane.
Darker-maned individuals may have longer reproductive lives and higher offspring survival, although they suffer in the hottest months of the year.
The white lion is not a distinct subspecies, but a special morph with a genetic condition, leucism.
Lions spend much of their time resting and are inactive for about 20 hours per day.
Lions are the most socially inclined of all wild felids, most of which remain quite solitary in nature.
The lion is a predatory carnivore with two types of social organization.
Some lions are residents, living in groups of related lionesses, their mates, and offspring. Such a group is called a pride.
Male cubs are excluded from their maternal pride when they reach maturity at around 2–3 years of age.
Lionesses do most of the hunting for their pride.