Elephant
Elephant
African elephants have larger ears and concave backs while Asian elephants have smaller ears and convex or level backs.
Elephants are herbivorous and can be found in different habitats including savannahs, forests, deserts and marshes.
Elephants are considered to be keystone species due to their impact on their environments.
Elephants have a fission–fusion society in which multiple family groups come together to socialise.
Males leave their family groups when they reach puberty, and may live alone or with other males.
Elephants can live up to 70 years in the wild.
Elephant intelligence has been compared with that of primates and cetaceans.
Elephants appear to have self-awareness and show empathy for dying or dead individuals of their kind.
African elephants are listed as vulnerable, while the Asian elephant is classed as endangered.
One of the biggest threats to elephant populations is the ivory trade, as the animals are poached for their ivory tusks.
Elephants are used as working animals in Asia.
In the past elephants were used in war; today, they are often controversially put on display in zoos, or exploited for entertainment in circuses.
Elephants are highly recognisable and have been featured in art, folklore, religion, literature and popular culture.
Elephants are the largest living terrestrial animals.
Among African elephants, the forest form is smaller than the savannah form.
The skeleton of the elephant is made up of 326–351 bones.
African elephants have 21 pairs of ribs, while Asian elephants have 19 or 20 pairs.
An elephant's skull is resilient enough to withstand the forces generated by the leverage of the tusks and head-to-head collisions.
Elephant ears have thick bases with thin tips.
The trunk is a fusion of the nose and upper lip, although in early fetal life, the upper lip and trunk are separated.
The trunk is elongated and specialised to become the elephant's most important and versatile appendage.
It contains up to 150,000 separate muscle fascicles, with no bone and little fat.
Elephant trunks have multiple functions, including breathing, olfaction, touching, grasping, and sound production.
The trunk's ability to make powerful twisting and coiling movements allows it to collect food, wrestle with conspecifics, and lift up to 350 kg (770 lb).
With its trunk, an elephant can reach items at heights of up to 7 m (23 ft) and dig for water under mud or sand.
An adult Asian elephant is capable of holding 8.5 L (2.2 US gal) of water in its trunk.
When underwater, the elephant uses its trunk as a snorkel.
The African elephant has two finger-like extensions at the tip of the trunk that allow it to grasp and bring food to its mouth.
Elephants usually have 26 teeth: the incisors, known as the tusks, 12 deciduous premolars, and 12 molars.
The chewing teeth are replaced six times in a typical elephant's lifetime.
The tusks of an elephant are modified incisors in the upper jaw.
Like humans, who are typically right- or left-handed, elephants are usually right- or left-tusked.
Hunting for elephant ivory in Africa and Asia has led to natural selection for shorter tusks and tusklessness.
An elephant's skin is generally very tough, at 2.5 cm (1 in) thick on the back and parts of the head.
Asian elephants have some patches of depigmentation, particularly on the forehead and ears and the areas around them.
Normally the skin of an Asian elephant is covered with more hair than its African counterpart.
An elephant uses mud as a sunscreen, protecting its skin from ultraviolet light.