Frog
Frog
Frogs are widely distributed, ranging from the tropics to subarctic regions, but the greatest concentration of species diversity is in tropical rainforests.
The skin of the frog is glandular, with secretions ranging from distasteful to toxic.
Frogs typically lay their eggs in water.
Adult frogs generally have a carnivorous diet consisting of small invertebrates, but omnivorous species exist and a few feed on fruit.
Frogs are extremely efficient at converting what they eat into body mass.
Frogs are valued as food by humans and also have many cultural roles in literature, symbolism and religion.
Frog populations have declined significantly since the 1950s.
The use of the common names "frog" and "toad" has no taxonomic justification.
Frogs have no tail, except as larvae, and most have long hind legs, elongated ankle bones, webbed toes, no claws, large eyes, and a smooth or warty skin.
Frogs have short vertebral columns, with no more than 10 free vertebrae and fused tailbones (urostyle or coccyx).
The ribs are poorly developed, so the lungs are filled by buccal pumping and a frog deprived of its lungs can maintain its body functions without them.
Frogs have three eyelid membranes: one is transparent to protect the eyes underwater, and two vary from translucent to opaque.
True toads completely lack teeth, but most frogs have them, specifically pedicellate teeth in which the crown is separated from the root by fibrous tissue.
No teeth are in the lower jaw and frogs usually swallow their food whole.
Frogs must be able to move quickly through their environment to catch prey and escape predators, and numerous adaptations help them to do so.
Most frogs are either proficient at jumping or are descended from ancestors that were, with much of the musculoskeletal morphology modified for this purpose.
Many frogs have webbed feet and the degree of webbing is directly proportional to the amount of time the species spends in the water.
Arboreal frogs have pads located on the ends of their toes to help grip vertical surfaces.
When the frog applies pressure, the cells adhere to irregularities on the surface and the grip is maintained through surface tension.
In many arboreal frogs, a small "intercalary structure" on each toe increases the surface area touching the substrate.
Since hopping through trees can be dangerous, many arboreal frogs have hip joints to allow both hopping and walking.
Some frogs that live high in trees even possess an elaborate degree of webbing between their toes.
Ground-dwelling frogs generally lack the adaptations of aquatic and arboreal frogs. Most have smaller toe pads, if any, and little webbing.
A frog's skin is protective, has a respiratory function, can absorb water and helps control body temperature.
Being cold-blooded, frogs have to adopt suitable behaviour patterns to regulate their temperature.
The colour of a frog's skin is used for thermoregulation. In cool damp conditions, the colour will be darker than on a hot dry day.
Many frogs are able to absorb water and oxygen directly through the skin.
Some arboreal frogs reduce water loss by having a waterproof layer of skin, and several South American species coat their skin with a waxy secretion.
Some frogs have adopted behaviours to conserve water, including becoming nocturnal and resting in a water-conserving position.
Some frogs may rest in large groups with each frog pressed against its neighbours to reduce water loss.
Camouflage is a common defensive mechanism in frogs.
Most camouflaged frogs are nocturnal; during the day, they seek out a position where they can blend into the background and remain undetected.
Some frogs have the ability to change colour, but this is usually restricted to a small range of colours.
Certain frogs change colour between night and day, as light and moisture stimulate the pigment cells and cause them to expand or contract.
The skin of a frog is permeable to oxygen and carbon dioxide, as well as to water.
There are blood vessels near the surface of the skin and when a frog is underwater, oxygen diffuses directly into the blood.
Frogs have three-chambered hearts, a feature they share with lizards.
Some species of frog have adaptations that allow them to survive in oxygen deficient water.
Frogs have maxillary teeth along their upper jaw which are used to hold food before it is swallowed.
The frog uses its sticky, cleft tongue to catch flies and other small moving prey.
Some frogs have no tongue and just stuff food into their mouths with their hands.
Although adapted to terrestrial life, frogs resemble freshwater fish in their inability to conserve body water effectively.
The frog has a highly developed nervous system that consists of a brain, spinal cord and nerves.
Many parts of the frog's brain correspond with those of humans.
The relative size of the cerebrum in frogs is much smaller than it is in humans.
The eyes of most frogs are located on either side of the head near the top and project outwards as hemispherical bulges.