Emu
Emu
The emu is endemic to Australia where it is the largest native bird.
Emus are soft-feathered, brown, flightless birds with long necks and legs, and can reach up to 1.9 metres (6.2 ft) in height.
Emus can travel great distances, and when necessary can sprint at 50 km/h (31 mph).
Emus forage for a variety of plants and insects, but have been known to go for weeks without eating.
Emus drink infrequently, but take in copious amounts of water when the opportunity arises.
The emu is an important cultural icon of Australia, appearing on the coat of arms and various coins.
The emu features prominently in Indigenous Australian mythology.
Emus were first reported as having been seen by Europeans when explorers visited the western coast of Australia in 1696.
The etymology of the common name "emu" is uncertain, but is thought to have come from an Arabic word for large bird.
In 2009, it was estimated that there were between 630,000 and 725,000 emus.
The emu is the second largest bird in the world, only being exceeded in size by the ostrich.
The largest emus can reach up to 150 to 190 cm (59 to 75 in) in height.
Measured from the bill to the tail, emus range in length from 139 to 164 cm (55 to 65 in).
Emus weigh between 18 and 60 kg (40 and 132 lb), with an average of 31.5 and 37 kg (69 and 82 lb) in males and females, respectively.
Although flightless, emus have vestigial wings, the wing chord measuring around 20 cm (8 in), and each wing having a small claw at the tip.
Emus flap their wings when running, perhaps as a means of stabilising themselves when moving fast.
Emus have long necks and legs, and can run at speeds of 48 km/h (30 mph) due to their highly specialised pelvic limb musculature.
When walking, the emu takes strides of about 100 cm (3.3 ft), but at full gallop, a stride can be as long as 275 cm (9 ft).
Emus have good eyesight and hearing, which allows them to detect threats at some distance.
The neck of the emu is pale blue and shows through its sparse feathers.
A unique feature of the emu feather is the double rachis emerging from a single shaft.
Feathers of emus in more arid areas with red soils have a rufous tint while birds residing in damp conditions are generally darker in hue.
The eyes of an emu are protected by nictitating membranes.
Emus live in various habitats across Australia both inland and near the coast.
Emus have been shown to travel long distances to reach abundant feeding areas.
Emus are diurnal birds and spend their day foraging, preening their plumage with their beak, dust bathing and resting.
Emus are able to swim when necessary, although they rarely do so unless the area is flooded or they need to cross a river.
Emus begin to settle down at sunset and sleep during the night.
Overall, an emu sleeps for around seven hours in each twenty-four-hour period.
Young emus usually sleep with their neck flat and stretched forward along the ground surface.
The vocalisations of emus mostly consist of various booming and grunting sounds.
On very hot days, emus pant to maintain their body temperature, their lungs work as evaporative coolers.
As with other ratites, emus have a relatively low basal metabolic rate compared to other types of birds.
Emus forage in a diurnal pattern and eat a variety of native and introduced plant species.
Emus typically drink once a day, first inspecting the water body and surrounding area in groups before kneeling down at the edge to drink.
If not disturbed, emus may drink continuously for ten minutes.
Due to the scarcity of water sources, emus are sometimes forced to go without water for several days.
In the wild, emus often share water holes with kangaroos, other birds and animals.
There are few native natural predators of emus still alive.
Emus were used as a source of food by indigenous Australians and early European settlers.
Emus are inquisitive birds and have been known to approach humans if they see unexpected movement of a limb or piece of clothing.
The early European settlers killed emus to provide food and used their fat for fuelling lamps.
The emus were a food and fuel source for early European settlers, and are now farmed, in Australia and elsewhere, for their meat, oil and leather.
Commercial emu farming started in Western Australia around 1970.
Emus are farmed primarily for their meat, leather, feathers and oil, and 95% of the carcass can be used.
Emu meat is a low-fat product (less than 1.5% fat), and is comparable to other lean meats.
The feathers and eggs are used in decorative arts and crafts.
Several of the Sydney rock engravings depict emus, and the birds are mimicked in indigenous dances.
The emu is popularly but unofficially considered as a faunal emblem – the national bird of Australia.