Lion
Lion
Both males and females can defend the pride against intruders, but the male lion is better-suited for this purpose due to its stockier, more powerful build.
Lions tend to assume specific roles in the pride.
Lions prefer to scavenge when the opportunity presents itself with carrion providing more than 50% of their diet.
In fact, most dead prey on which both hyenas and lions feed upon are killed by the hyenas instead of the lions.
The male lion associated with the pride usually stays and watches over young cubs until the lionesses return from the hunt.
Lions usually hunt in coordinated groups and stalk their chosen prey.
Lions attack domestic livestock and in India cattle contribute significantly to their diet.
Lions are capable of killing other predators such as leopards, cheetahs, hyenas, and wild dogs, though they seldom devour the competitors after killing them.
A lion may gorge itself and eat up to 30 kg (66 lb) in one sitting; if it is unable to consume all the kill it will rest for a few hours before consuming more.
An adult lioness requires an average of about 5 kg (11 lb) of meat per day, a male about 7 kg (15 lb).
Because lionesses hunt in open spaces where they are easily seen by their prey, cooperative hunting increases the likelihood of a successful hunt.
There is evidence that male lions are just as successful at hunting as females; they are solo hunters who ambush prey in small bush.
Young lions first display stalking behaviour around three months of age, although they do not participate in hunting until they are almost a year old.
Lions and spotted hyenas occupy the same ecological niche, meaning they compete for prey and carrion in the areas where they coexist.
The size of male lions allows them occasionally to confront hyenas in otherwise evenly matched brawls and so to tip the balance in favour of the lions.
Lions tend to dominate smaller felines such as cheetahs and leopards where they co-occur, stealing their kills.
The cheetah has a 50% chance of losing its kill to lions or other predators.
The Nile crocodile is the only sympatric predator (besides humans) that can singly threaten the lion.
Lionesses with cubs of their own are more likely to be tolerant of another lioness's cubs than lionesses without cubs.
Nomadic lionesses rarely manage to raise their cubs to maturity, without the protection of other pride members.
Although adult lions have no natural predators, evidence suggests that the majority die violently from humans or other lions.
Lions have an array of facial expressions and body postures that serve as visual gestures.
Lion sounds include snarling, hissing, coughing, miaowing, woofing, and roaring.
Lions tend to roar in a very characteristic manner, starting with a few deep, long roars that trail off into a series of shorter ones.
Lions have the loudest roar of any big cat.
Lions are part of a group of exotic animals that are the core of zoo exhibits since the late eighteenth century.
Although many modern zoos are more selective about their exhibits, there are more than 1,000 African and 100 Asiatic lions in zoos and wildlife parks around the world.
The wild animals trade flourished alongside improved colonial trade of the nineteenth century. Lions were considered fairly common and inexpensive.
The lion has been an icon for humanity for thousands of years, appearing in cultures across Europe, Asia, and Africa.
Despite incidents of attacks on humans, lions have enjoyed a positive depiction in culture as strong and noble.
The Asiatic lion is a common motif in Chinese art.
"Lion" was the nickname of several medieval warrior rulers with a reputation for bravery.
Lions are frequently depicted on coats of arms, either as a device on shields themselves, or as supporters.
The lion is used as a symbol of sporting teams.
Lions continue to be featured in modern literature.
The lion's role as king of the beasts has been used in cartoons, such as the 1994 Disney animated feature film The Lion King.