Koala
Koala
The koala is an arboreal herbivorous marsupial native to Australia.
Koala is easily recognisable by its stout, tailless body and large head with round, fluffy ears and large, spoon-shaped nose.
The koala has a body length of 60–85 cm (24–33 in) and weighs 4–15 kg (9–33 lb).
Koalas from the northern populations are typically smaller and lighter in colour than their counterparts further south.
Koalas typically inhabit open eucalypt woodlands, and the leaves of these trees make up most of their diet.
Because this eucalypt diet has limited nutritional and caloric content, koalas are largely sedentary and sleep up to 20 hours a day.
Koalas are asocial animals, and bonding exists only between mothers and dependent offspring.
Adult males communicate with loud bellows that intimidate rivals and attract mates.
Males mark their presence with secretions from scent glands located on their chests.
Koalas give birth to underdeveloped young that crawl into their mothers' pouches, where they stay for the first six to seven months of their lives.
Koalas have few natural predators and parasites, but are threatened by various pathogens.
Koalas were hunted by indigenous Australians and depicted in myths and cave art for millennia.
The first recorded encounter between a European and a koala was in 1798, and an image of the animal was published in 1810.
The biggest threat to their existence is habitat destruction caused by agriculture and urbanisation.
During the Oligocene and Miocene, koalas lived in rainforests and had less specialised diets.
The koala is a stocky animal with a large head and vestigial or non-existent tail.
The species is sexually dimorphic, with males 50% larger than females.
Males are distinguished from females by their more curved noses and the presence of chest glands, which are visible as hairless patches.
The pelage of the koala is thicker and longer on the back, and shorter on the belly.
The ears have thick fur on both the inside and outside.
The back fur colour varies from light grey to chocolate brown.
The belly fur is whitish; on the rump it is dappled whitish, and darker at the back.
The koala has the most effective insulating back fur of any marsupial and is highly resilient to wind and rain.
The koala's curved, sharp claws are well adapted for climbing trees.
The large forepaws have two opposable digits that allow them to grasp small branches.
As in humans and other primates, koalas have friction ridges on their paws.
The koala has a sturdy skeleton and a short, muscular upper body with proportionately long upper limbs.
The koala has a cartilaginous pad at the end of the spine that may make it more comfortable when it perches in the fork of a tree.
The koala has one of the smallest brains in proportion to body weight of any mammal.
The koala's small brain size may be an adaptation to the energy restrictions imposed by its diet, which is insufficient to sustain a larger brain.
Because of its small brain, the koala has a limited ability to perform complex, unfamiliar behaviours.
When presented with plucked leaves on a flat surface, the koala cannot adapt to the change in its normal feeding routine and will not eat the leaves.
The koala's olfactory senses are normal, and it is known to sniff the oils of individual branchlets to assess their edibility.
The koala's round ears provide it with good hearing, and it has a well-developed middle ear.
The koala's vision is not well developed, and its relatively small eyes are unusual among marsupials in that the pupils have vertical slits.