Elephant
Elephant
Without regular mud baths to protect it from burning, insect bites, and moisture loss, an elephant's skin suffers serious damage.
After bathing, the elephant will usually use its trunk to blow dust onto its body and this dries into a protective crust.
To support the animal's weight, an elephant's limbs are positioned more vertically under the body than in most other mammals.
Since the limb bones are placed on top of each other and under the body, an elephant can stand still for long periods of time without using much energy.
Elephants can move both forwards and backwards, but cannot trot, jump, or gallop.
Elephants are capable swimmers.
The brain of an elephant weighs 4.5–5.5 kg (10–12 lb) compared to 1.6 kg (4 lb) for a human brain.
At birth, an elephant's brain already weighs 30–40% of its adult weight.
The heart of an elephant weighs 12–21 kg (26–46 lb).
When standing, the elephant's heart beats approximately 30 times per minute.
Unlike many other animals, the heart rate speeds up by 8 to 10 beats per minute when the elephant is lying down.
Elephants inhale mostly through the trunk, although some air goes through the mouth.
Forest elephants mainly live in equatorial forests, but will enter gallery forests and ecotones between forests and savannahs.
Elephants are herbivorous and will eat leaves, twigs, fruit, bark, grass and roots.
Elephants tend to stay near water sources.
At midday, elephants rest under trees and may doze off while standing.
Elephants average 3–4 hours of sleep per day.
Elephants go on seasonal migrations in search of food, water and mates.
Because of their large size, elephants have a huge impact on their environments and are considered keystone species.
Elephants typically coexist peacefully with other herbivores, which will usually stay out of their way.
Touching is an important form of communication among elephants.
Elephants greet each other by stroking or wrapping their trunks; the latter also occurs during mild competition.
Older elephants use trunk-slaps, kicks and shoves to discipline younger ones.
Elephants produce several sounds, usually through the larynx, though some may be modified by the trunk.
Fighting elephants may roar or squeal, and wounded ones may bellow.
Elephants are among the species known to use tools.
An Asian elephant has been observed modifying branches and using them as flyswatters.
African elephants receive at least some legal protection in every country where they are found, but 70% of their range exists outside protected areas.
The poaching of elephants for their ivory, meat and hides has been one of the major threats to their existence.
Historically, numerous cultures made ornaments and other works of art from elephant ivory, and its use rivalled that of gold.
Elephants can be trained to respond to over 30 commands.
Historically, elephants were considered formidable instruments of war.
Elephants have been represented in art since Paleolithic times.
Elephants were often difficult to portray by people with no first-hand experience with them.
At the beginning of the Middle Ages, when Europeans had little to no access to the animals, elephants were portrayed more like fantasy creatures.
Elephants have been the subject of religious beliefs.
In Buddhism, Buddha is said to have been a white elephant reincarnated as a human.
Elephants were thought to be religious themselves by the Romans, who believed that they worshipped the sun and stars.