Frog
Frog
The distant vision of a frog is better than its near vision.
Calling frogs will quickly become silent when they see an intruder or even a moving shadow but the closer an object is, the less well it is seen.
When a frog shoots out its tongue to catch an insect it is reacting to a small moving object that it cannot see well and must line it up precisely beforehand.
Whether a frog sees in colour is debatable but it has been shown that it responds positively to blue light.
Frogs can hear both in the air and below water.
A frog may be startled by an unexpected noise but it will not usually take any action until it has located the source of the sound by sight.
The call or croak of a frog is unique to its species.
Frogs create this sound by passing air through the larynx in the throat.
Some frog calls are so loud that they can be heard up to a mile away.
During extreme conditions, some frogs enter a state of torpor and remain inactive for months.
In colder regions, many species of frog hibernate in winter.
Some frogs can even survive being frozen.
An apparently lifeless, frozen frog can resume respiration and the heart beat can restart when conditions warm up.
Frogs have been found to have upper critical temperatures of around 41 degrees Celsius.
Different species of frog use a number of methods of moving around including jumping, running, walking, swimming, burrowing, climbing and gliding.
Frogs are generally recognized as exceptional jumpers and, relative to their size, the best jumpers of all vertebrates.
Frogs that live in or visit water have adaptations that improve their swimming abilities.
Some frogs have become adapted for burrowing and a life underground.
Tree frogs live high in the canopy, where they scramble around on the branches, twigs, and leaves, sometimes never coming down to earth.
During the evolutionary history of the frog, several different groups have independently taken to the air.
Some frogs in the tropical rainforest are specially adapted for gliding from tree to tree or parachuting to the forest floor.
Frogs' embryos are typically surrounded by several layers of gelatinous material.
Some species go through metamorphosis while still inside the egg and hatch directly into small frogs.
At the end of the tadpole stage, a frog undergoes metamorphosis in which its body makes a sudden transition into the adult form.
Frogs are at their most vulnerable to predators when they are undergoing metamorphosis.
Almost all frog species are carnivorous as adults, preying on invertebrates, including arthropods, worms, snails, and slugs.
Adult frogs are themselves attacked by many predators.
Frogs are primary predators and an important part of the food web.
Little is known about the longevity of frogs and toads in the wild, but some can live for many years.
Although care of offspring is poorly understood in frogs, up to an estimated 20% of amphibian species may care for their young in some way.
Some frogs protect their offspring inside their own bodies.
The skin of many frogs contains mild toxic substances called bufotoxins to make them unpalatable to potential predators.
Poisonous frogs tend to advertise their toxicity with bright colours.
Some frogs, such as the poison dart frogs, are especially toxic.
Some frogs use bluff or deception.
Frogs live on all the continents except Antarctica, but they are not present on certain islands, especially those far away from continental land masses.
Usually, a greater diversity of frogs occurs in tropical areas than in temperate regions, such as Europe.
Some frogs inhabit arid areas, such as deserts, and rely on specific adaptations to survive.
Some frog species are adapted to a cold environment.
The wood frog , whose habitat extends into the Arctic Circle, buries itself in the ground during winter.
Frog mutations and genetic defects have increased since the 1990s.
Frog legs are eaten by humans in many parts of the world.
Frogs are used for dissections in high school and university anatomy classes.
Frogs have served as experimental animals throughout the history of science.
Frogs are used in cloning research and other branches of embryology.
Because frog toxins are extraordinarily diverse, they have raised the interest of biochemists as a "natural pharmacy".
Frogs feature prominently in folklore, fairy tales, and popular culture. They tend to be portrayed as benign, ugly, and clumsy, but with hidden talents.